War and Peace  is the most famous and at the same time the most daunting of Russian novels, as vast as Russia itself and as long to cross from one end to the other. Yet if one makes the journey, the sights seen and the people met on the way mark one’s life forever. The book is set in the period of the Napoleonic wars (1805–1812) and tells of the interweaving of historical events with the private lives of two very different families of the Russian nobility—the severe Bolkonskys and the easygoing Rostovs—and of a singular man, reminiscent of the author himself—Count Pierre Bezukhov. It embodies the national myth of “Russia’s glorious period,” as Tolstoy himself called it, in the confrontation of the emperor Napoleon and Field Marshal Kutuzov, and at the same time it challenges that myth and all such myths through the vivid portrayal of the fates of countless ordinary people of the period, men and women, young and old, French as well as Russian, and through the author’s own passionate questioning of the truth of history.
He could…not only could, but should have ridden up to the sovereign. And that was a unique chance to show the sovereign his devotion. And he had not made use of it…“What have I done?” he thought. And he turned his horse and rode back to the place where he had seen the emperor; but there was no one now on the other side of the ditch. Only wagons and carriages drove along. From one cart driver he learned that Kutuzov’s staff was in a nearby village, where the train was going. Rostov followed them.
“Vivat!”  the Poles cried just as rapturously, breaking their lines and crushing each other in order to see him. Napoleon surveyed the river, dismounted, and sat on a log that lay on the bank. At a wordless sign he was handed a field glass, placed it on the back of a happy page who ran over, and began to look at the other side. Then he immersed himself in examining a map laid out among the logs. Without raising his head, he said something, and two of his adjutants rode over to the Polish uhlans.
Four days earlier, the sentinels of the Preobrazhensky regiment were standing by the house to which Balashov was brought; now two French grenadiers stood there, in blue uniforms open on the chest and shaggy hats. A convoy of hussars and uhlans, and a dazzling suite of adjutants, pages, and generals, expecting Napoleon to come out, waited by the porch near his saddle horse and his Mameluke Rustan.12 Napoleon was to receive Balashov in the same house in Vilno from which Alexander had sent him off.
She was no longer in the smock she had on that morning, but was wearing one of her best gowns; her hair was carefully done, and in her face there was animation, which, however, did not conceal the sagging and deadened contours of her face. In a costume she used to wear in Petersburg society, it was still more noticeable how far she had lost her good looks. Mlle Bourienne’s costume had also undergone some sort of inconspicuous improvement, which made her fresh, pretty face still more attractive.
The unpleasant impression, like the remains of fog in a clear sky, passed over the emperor’s young and happy face and disappeared. He was somewhat thinner that day, after his illness, than on the field of Olm&#252;tz, where Bolkonsky had seen him for the first time abroad, but there was the same enchanting combination of majesty and mildness in his beautiful gray eyes, and the fine lips had the same possibility of various expressions, with a prevalent expression of good-natured, innocent youth.
Across from Nikolai was a field of winter wheat, and there stood one of his hunters, alone, in a hollow behind an upthrust hazel bush. As soon as the hounds were loosed into the ravine, Nikolai heard the intermittent baying of a dog he knew—Voltorn; other dogs joined him, now falling silent, now giving tongue again. A moment later from the woods came a foxhunting cry, and the whole pack, joining together, went racing along the edge of the ravine in the direction of the field, away from Nikolai.
At the beginning of winter, Prince Nikolai Andreich Bolkonsky came to Moscow with his daughter. Because of his past, because of his intelligence and originality, and especially because of the weakening just then of the raptures over the reign of Alexander I, and because of the anti-French and patriotic tendencies which reigned at that time in Moscow, Prince Nikolai Andreich at once became an object of special deference among the Muscovites and the center of Moscow opposition to the government.
Before them, coming from Olm&#252;tz, a moving group appeared. And at the same time, though it was a windless day, a light current of wind ran through the army and barely stirred the lance pennants and slack standards, which began to flutter against their staffs. It seemed the army itself, by this slight movement, was expressing its joy at the approaching sovereigns. A single voice was heard: “Attention!” Then, like cocks at dawn, voices repeated it from all ends. And everything became still.
Rostov stopped his horse for a minute on a knoll, so as to see what was going on; but no matter how he strained his attention, he could neither understand nor make out what was going on: some sort of men were moving about in the smoke; some sort of sheets of troops were moving in front and behind; but why? who? where?—it was impossible to grasp. The sights and sounds not only did not arouse any sort of dejected or timid feelings in him, but, on the contrary, gave him energy and determination.
In general, the main feature that struck Prince Andrei in Speransky’s mind was his unquestionable, unshakeable faith in the power and legitimacy of reason. It was clear that the notion, so usual for Prince Andrei, that it was after all impossible to express everything one thinks, would never have entered Speransky’s head, and it never occurred to him to wonder: “Isn’t everything I think and believe sheer nonsense?” And that special cast of Speransky’s mind attracted Prince Andrei most of all.
“But what’s to be done? There are only a few months before the year is out. And it’s bound to happen. I only wish I could spare my brother the first moments. I wish they’d come soon. I hope to become close with her…You’ve known them a long time,” said Princess Marya, “tell me, hand on heart, the whole real truth: what kind of girl is she and how you find her? But the whole truth; because, you understand, Andrei is risking so much in doing this against his father’s will that I’d like to know…”
“Pierre! Been back long?” a familiar voice cried to him. Pierre raised his head. In a double sleigh harnessed to two gray trotters that kicked snow back into the dashboard, Anatole flashed by with his usual friend Makarin. Anatole was sitting upright in the classical pose of a military fop, the lower part of his face wrapped in a beaver collar, his head bent slightly. His face was ruddy and fresh, his white-plumed hat was cocked, revealing his curled and pomaded hair sprinkled with fine snow.
“Ah! I’ll be very glad,” said the prince. “Tell me,” he added, as if just recalling something and with special casualness, though what he asked about was the main purpose of his visit, “is it true that l’imp&#233;ratrice-m&#232;re §12 wants Baron Funke to be named first secretary in Vienna? C’est un pauvre sire, ce baron, &#224; ce qu’il para&#238;t. ”#13 Prince Vassily wanted his son to be appointed to this post, which, through the empress Maria Feodorovna, had been solicited for the baron.
“Have you never thought of getting your prodigal son Anatole married? They say,” she observed, “that old maids ont la manie des marriages. †19 I don’t feel I have that weakness yet, but I know one petite personne  who is very unhappy with her father, une parente &#224; nous, une princesse  Bolkonsky.”‡20 Prince Vassily did not reply, though, with the quickness of grasp and memory characteristic of society people, he showed by a nod of the head that he had taken this information into account.
Pierre smiled, but it was clear from his smile that he realized it was not the anecdote about Sergei Kuzmich that interested Prince Vassily just then; and Prince Vassily realized that Pierre realized it. Prince Vassily suddenly burbled something and left. To Pierre it looked as if even Prince Vassily was embarrassed. The sight of this worldly old man’s embarrassment touched Pierre; he glanced at H&#233;l&#232;ne—she, too, seemed embarrassed, and her glance said: “Well, it’s your own fault.”
Rostov saw that they had thought it out very well. Sonya had already struck him with her beauty yesterday. Today, having glimpsed her fleetingly, he thought her better still. She was a lovely sixteen-year-old girl, obviously passionately in love with him (he did not doubt it for a moment). Why shouldn’t he love her and even marry her? thought Rostov; but not now. Now there were so many other joys and things to do! “Yes, they’ve thought it out splendidly,” he thought. “I should remain free.”
The regimental commander was afraid that he might be blamed for that and made no reply. Just then the officer noticed the face of the captain with the red nose and drawn-in stomach and mimicked his face and pose so perfectly that Nesvitsky could not keep from laughing. Kutuzov turned around. It was clear that the officer could control his face at will: the moment Kutuzov turned around, the officer managed to make a scowl and then assume a most serious, deferential, and innocent expression.
At the moment when the horse guards, going past him, disappeared into the smoke, Rostov hesitated whether to gallop after them or ride where he was supposed to. This was that brilliant attack of the horse guards which astonished the French themselves. Rostov was horrified to hear later that, of all that mass of enormous, handsome men, of all those brilliant, rich men, youths, officers, and junkers, who had ridden past him on thousand-rouble horses, only eighteen were left after the attack.
Despite the fact that someone’s carriage was standing at the entrance, the porter, having looked over the mother and son (who, without asking to be announced, had walked directly through the glass entryway between two rows of statues in niches), with a significant glance at the old mantle, asked whom they wanted to see, the princesses or the count, and, on learning that it was the count, said that his excellency was feeling worse that day, and that his excellency was not receiving anyone.
It was already dusk when Prince Andrei and Pierre drove up to the main entrance of the house at Bald Hills. As they were driving up, Prince Andrei, smiling, drew Pierre’s attention to the bustling that was going on by the back porch. A bent old woman with a bundle on her back and a short man dressed in black and with long hair, seeing the carriage drive up, went running back to the gate. Two women ran out after them, and all four, glancing at the carriage, ran fearfully up the back porch.
They went into the elegantly, newly, richly decorated dining room. Everything from the napkins to the silverware, china, and crystal bore that special stamp of newness that is found in the households of the recently married. In the middle of supper, the prince leaned his elbow on the table and, with an expression of nervous irritation such as Pierre had never seen in his friend before, began to talk, like a man who has long had something on his heart and suddenly decides to speak it out:
“If you had told me long ago, mama, I would have left at once,” she said and went to her room. But, passing through the sitting room, she noticed two couples sitting symmetrically by the two windows. She stopped and smiled disdainfully. Sonya was sitting close to Nikolai, who was writing out some verses for her, the first he had ever written. Boris and Natasha were sitting by the other window and fell silent when Vera came in. Sonya and Natasha looked at Vera with guilty and happy faces.
The sovereign’s horse shied at the sudden shout. This horse, who had carried the sovereign at reviews while still in Russia, also carried her rider here, on the field of Austerlitz, enduring the distracted nudges of his left foot, pricked up her ears at the sound of gunshots just as she did on the Field of Mars, understanding neither the meaning of the shots she heard, nor the presence of the emperor Franz’s black stallion, nor anything of what her rider said, thought, or felt that day.
“Anatole would come to borrow money from her and would kiss her bare shoulders. She didn’t give him the money, but allowed him to kiss her. Her father, joking, tried to arouse her jealousy; she said with a calm smile that she was not so stupid as to be jealous: he can do as he likes, she said of me. I asked her once whether she felt any signs of pregnancy. She laughed scornfully and said she was not such a fool as to want to have children, and that she would not have children from me. ”
The vicomte  told very nicely the then current anecdote that the duc d’Enghien had secretly gone to Paris to meet with Mlle George, and that there he had met Bonaparte, who also enjoyed the famous actress’s favors, and that there, having met the duke, Napoleon happened to fall into one of those faints he was prone to and found himself in the duke’s power, which the duke did not take advantage of, and that Bonaparte afterwards revenged himself for this magnanimity with the duke’s death.
“But you are un philosophe,  so be one fully, look at things from another angle, and you’ll see that your duty is, on the contrary, to protect yourself. Let others, who are good for nothing else, do that…You weren’t told to come back, and you haven’t been dismissed from here; therefore you can stay and come with us wherever our sorry fate takes us. They say they’re going to Olm&#252;tz. Now, Olm&#252;tz is a very nice town. And you and I can calmly drive there together in my carriage.”
In the evening of the twenty-fourth of June, Count Zhilinsky, Boris’s roommate, gave a supper for his French acquaintances. At this supper there was a guest of honor—one of Napoleon’s adjutants—as well as several officers of the French guards, and a young boy from an old French aristocratic family, Napoleon’s page. On that same day, Rostov, taking advantage of the darkness so as not to be recognized, in civilian dress, arrived in Tilsit and went to the apartment of Zhilinsky and Boris.
The thin, hollow-cheeked Chekmar, having set everything up for himself, kept glancing at his master, with whom he had lived in perfect harmony for thirty years, and understanding his pleasant state of mind, expected some pleasant conversation. A third person also rode up cautiously (clearly he had already learned his lesson) from beyond the woods, and stopped behind the count. This person was an old, gray-bearded man in a woman’s coat and tall hat. He was the buffoon Nastasya Ivanovna.
Among the gentlemen of the suite, Rostov noticed Bolkonsky, sitting his horse lazily and casually. Rostov remembered his quarrel with him yesterday, and the question arose whether he should or should not challenge him. “Of course not,” Rostov thought now…“And is it worth thinking and talking about it at a moment like this? At a moment of such a feeling of love, rapture, and self-denial—what are all our quarrels and offenses?! I love everybody, I forgive everybody now,” thought Rostov.
So spoke, in July 1805, the renowned Anna Pavlovna Scherer, maid of honor and intimate of the empress Maria Feodorovna, greeting the important and high-ranking Prince Vassily, the first to arrive at her soir&#233;e. Anna Pavlovna had been coughing for several days. She had the grippe,  as she put it (grippe  was a new word then, used only by rare people). Little notes had been sent out that morning with a red-liveried footman, and on all of them without distinction there was written:
The French, who had stopped firing on this field strewn with dead and wounded because there was nothing left alive on it, seeing an adjutant riding across it, aimed a cannon and fired several shots. The sensation of these whistling, fearsome sounds and the surrounding dead merged for Rostov into a single impression of terror and pity for himself. He recalled his mother’s last letter. “What would she feel,” he wondered, “if she saw me here now, on this field, with cannon aimed at me?”
“Ma bonne amie,”  the little princess said on the morning of the nineteenth of March, and her mustached little lip rose by old habit; but as, ever since the day the terrible news had been received, there had been sorrow not only in the smiles, but in the sounds of talk, even in the footsteps in that house, so now the smile of the little princess, who had succumbed to the general mood—though she did not know its cause—was such that it was all the more a reminder of the general sorrow.
And this simple reflection suddenly destroyed for Prince Andrei all his former interest in the reforms being carried out. That same day Prince Andrei was supposed to dine at Speransky’s “en petit comit&#233;,” *348 as the host had said when inviting him. This dinner in the circle of family and friends of the man whom Prince Andrei so admired had formerly interested him very much, the more so as he had not yet seen Speransky in his domestic surroundings; but now he did not want to go.
“Marry, marry, dear boy…They’re of good stock!…Clever people, eh? Rich, eh? Yes. A fine stepmother for Nikolushka. Write him that he can marry tomorrow even. She’ll be Nikolushka’s stepmother, and I’ll marry little Bourienne!…Ha, ha, ha, so he won’t be without a stepmother himself! Only one thing, there’s no need for more women in my house; let him marry and live separately. Maybe you’ll move in with him?” he turned to Princess Marya. “God help you, and good riddance…good riddance!…”
The hounds were united into a single pack, and the uncle and Nikolai rode side by side. Natasha, wrapped in shawls, from which her lively face peeked out with its bright eyes, galloped up to them, accompanied by Petya, who never left her side, and Mikhailo, a hunter and riding master, who was assigned to look after her. Petya laughed at something, and whipped and pulled his horse. Natasha adroitly and confidently sat her black Arabchik and with a sure hand effortlessly reined him in.
Natasha left off only when they told her there would be pineapple ice cream. Before the ice cream, champagne was served. The music struck up again, the count kissed his dear countess, and the guests, rising, wished the countess a happy name day, and clinked glasses across the table with the count, the children, and each other. Again the waiters scurried about, chairs scraped, and the guests, in the same order but with redder faces, returned to the drawing room and the count’s study.
But things were becoming urgent. Cannonades and gunfire, blending, rumbled on the right and in the center, and the French greatcoats of Lannes’s riflemen were already passing the mill dam and forming up on this side, two musket shots away. The infantry general went up to a horse with his bouncing gait, mounted it, becoming very straight and tall, and rode to the Pavlogradsky commander. The regimental commanders came together with polite bows and with concealed spite in their hearts.
“Si vous envisager la question sous ce point de vue,” †340 he began, articulating in French with obvious difficulty and speaking still more slowly than in Russian, but perfectly calmly. He said that honor, l’honneur,  could not be supported by privileges detrimental to the course of government service, that honor, l’honneur,  was either a negative notion of not committing reprehensible acts, or a well-known source of competition for gaining approval and the rewards expressive of it.
Her brother often wondered, looking at her. It did not seem at all as if she was a loving fianc&#233;e separated from her future husband. She was level-headed, calm, altogether as cheerful as before. This surprised Nikolai, and it even made him look mistrustfully at this alliance with Bolkonsky. He did not believe that her fate was already decided, the less so as he had not seen her together with Prince Andrei. He kept thinking there was something wrong with this projected marriage.
The princess lay in the armchair, and Mlle Bourienne rubbed her temples. Princess Marya, supporting her sister-in-law, went on looking with her beautiful, tear-filled eyes at the door through which Prince Andrei had gone and making signs of the cross at him. From the study, like gunshots, came the oft-repeated angry sounds of the old man blowing his nose. As soon as Prince Andrei left, the door to the study quickly opened, and the old man’s stern figure appeared in its white smock.
In the third circle, Naryshkin was talking about the meeting of the Austrian council of war in which Suvorov had crowed like a cock in response to some Austrian general’s stupidity.7 Shinshin, who was standing there, was about to make a joke, saying that Kutuzov had been unable to learn even that simple skill—of crowing like a cock—from Suvorov; but the old men gave the joker a stern look, letting him feel that there and on that day it was improper to speak like that about Kutuzov.
“My God, my God, it’s all the same thing! Ah, where shall I go? What shall I do with myself?” And, stamping her feet, she quickly ran upstairs to Iogel, who lived on the upper floor with his wife. Iogel had two governesses sitting with him; there were plates of raisins, walnuts, and almonds on the table. The governesses were discussing whether it was cheaper to live in Moscow or in Odessa. Natasha sat down, listened to their conversation with a serious, thoughtful face, and got up.
The little princess and Mlle Bourienne had already received all the necessary information from the maid Masha about what a ruddy, dark-browed, handsome fellow the minister’s son was, and how his papa could barely drag his feet up the stairs, while he, like an eagle, ran up after him taking three steps at a time. On receiving this information, the little princess and Mlle Bourienne, their animatedly chattering voices heard already from the corridor, came into Princess Marya’s room.
“Me beg the sovereign!” Denisov said in a voice which he wanted to endow with its former energy and ardor, but which rang with futile irritability. “For what? If I were a robber, I’d ask for mercy, but I’m on trial because I brought the robbers to light. Let them take me to court, I’m not afraid of anybody; I’ve served the tsar and the fatherland honorably, and didn’t steal! To demote me and…Listen, I just write to them straight out, here’s what I write: ‘If I were an embezzler…’”
The squadron in which Rostov served had just had time to mount its horses when it was halted facing the enemy. Again, as on the Enns bridge, there was no one between the squadron and the enemy, and there lay between them, separating them, that same terrible line of the unknown and of fear, like the line separating the living from the dead. All the men sensed that line, and the question of whether they would or would not cross that line, and how they would cross it, troubled them.
It was already the beginning of June when Prince Andrei, on his way home, drove again into that birch woods, where that gnarled old oak had struck him so strangely and memorably. The ringing of the harness bells was still more muffled in the woods than a month ago; everything was filled out, shady, and dense; and the young firs scattered through the woods did not disrupt the overall beauty and, imitating the general character, showed the tender green of their fluffy young shoots.
Five times already, with other people, Prince Andrei had heard exactly the same phrase about the countess Zubov and the same laughter from his wife. He quietly went into the room. The princess, round, rosy, with her work in her hands, was sitting in an armchair and talking non-stop, telling over her Petersburg memories and even phrases. Prince Andrei went to her, stroked her head, and asked whether she had rested from the journey. She made a reply and went on with the same talk.
On returning from the review, Kutuzov, accompanied by the Austrian general, went to his office and, calling his adjutant, told him to bring him certain papers pertaining to the condition of the arriving troops and letters from Archduke Ferdinand, who was heading the army of the vanguard. Prince Andrei Bolkonsky came into the commander in chief’s office with the requested papers. Kutuzov and the Austrian member of the Hofkriegsrath were sitting over a map spread out on the table.
“Now it’s my turn to ask you ‘why,’ my dear,” said Bolkonsky. “I confess to you that I don’t understand, maybe there are diplomatic subtleties here that are beyond my feeble mind, but I don’t understand: Mack loses a whole army, the archduke Ferdinand and the archduke Karl give no signs of life and make blunder after blunder, Kutuzov alone finally gains a real victory, destroys the charme †190 of the French, and the minister of war isn’t even interested in learning the details!”
“Charm&#233;e de vous voir. Je suis tr&#232;s contente de vous voir,” §320 she said to Pierre as he was kissing her hand. She had known him as a child, and now his friendship with Andrei, the misfortune with his wife, and, above all, his kind, simple face disposed her towards him. She looked at him with her beautiful, luminous eyes and seemed to be saying: “I like you very much, but please don’t laugh at my people. ” Having exchanged the first phrases of greeting, they sat down.
Got up at eight o’clock, read the Holy Scriptures, then went to work [on the advice of his benefactor, Pierre had taken a post on one of the committees], came home for dinner, ate alone (the countess has many guests I find disagreeable), ate and drank with moderation, and after dinner copied out passages for the brothers. In the evening went down to the countess and told a funny story about B., and only remembered that I shouldn’t have done it when everybody was laughing loudly.
“Well, dear princess, here I’ve brought you my singer,” said the count, scraping and looking around uneasily, as if fearing the old prince might walk in. “I’m so glad you’ll be getting acquainted. A pity, a pity the prince is unwell,” and, having said a few more general phrases, he got up. “If you will permit me, Princess, to deposit my Natasha here for a quarter of an hour, I’ll drive over to the Dogs’ Square, just two steps away, to see Anna Semyonovna, and come back for her.”
While the couples were being placed and the musicians were tuning up, Pierre sat with his little partner. Natasha was perfectly happy: she was dancing with a grown-up  who had come from abroad.  She sat in full view of everyone and talked to him like a grown-up. In her hand was a fan which a young lady had given her to hold. And, assuming a most worldly pose (God knows where and when she had learned it), fanning herself and smiling through the fan, she talked with her partner.
And some twenty men from various ranks ran to the front of the company. The drummer and lead singer turned to face the singers, waved his arm, and struck up a drawn-out soldiers’ song that began: “It was dawn, the sun was rising…” and ended with the words: “And that, brothers, will our glory be with old man Kamensky…” The song had been composed in Turkey, and was now being sung in Austria, only with one change, that instead of “old man Kamensky,” they put in “old man Kutuzov.”
“Yes, what’s that other unpleasantness he writes?” Prince Andrei recalled the contents of his father’s letter. “Yes. Our side has won a victory over Bonaparte precisely when I’m not serving. Yes, yes, he keeps making fun of me…well, he’s welcome to…” And he began to read Bilibin’s letter, written in French. He read, not understanding half of it, read only so as to stop thinking for at least a minute about what he had been thinking of exclusively and painfully for all too long.
“No, now that she’s become a bas-bleu, †343 she has forever renounced her former passions,” he said to himself. “There is no example of a bas-bleu  having passions of the heart,” he repeated to himself a rule drawn from who knows where and which he undoubtedly believed. But, strangely, Boris’s presence in his wife’s drawing room (and he was there almost all the time) affected Pierre physically: it bound all his limbs, and destroyed the spontaneity and freedom of his movements.
The two girls in white dresses, with identical roses in their dark hair, curtsied identically, but the hostess involuntarily rested her gaze longer on the slender Natasha. She looked at her and smiled at her alone with a special smile, in addition to her hostess smile. Gazing at her, the hostess may have remembered the golden, irretrievable time of her girlhood, and her own first ball. The host also followed Natasha with his eyes and asked the count which one was his daughter.
During a figure in which he had to choose a lady, whispering to H&#233;l&#232;ne that he wanted to choose Countess Potocki, who seemed to have gone out to the balcony, he rushed, gliding over the parquet, to the door to the garden and, seeing the sovereign stepping onto the terrace with Balashov, stopped. The sovereign and Balashov were heading for the door. Boris, flustered, as if he had no time to retreat, pressed himself deferentially to the door frame and lowered his head.
The next day the regimental commander summoned Denisov and told him, covering his eyes with his spread fingers: “I look at it this way, I know nothing, and will not start proceedings; but I advise you to go to the staff and settle matters there in the provisions department, and, if possible, to sign a receipt that you received such-and-such provisions; in the contrary case—since the request was put in by the infantry regiment—proceedings could be started and might end badly.”
Natasha had grown prettier in the country, as everybody told her, and that evening, owing to her agitated state, she was especially pretty. She struck people by her fullness of life and beauty, combined with her indifference to everything around her. Her black eyes gazed at the crowd without seeking anyone, her slender arm, bared above the elbow, rested on the velvet rail, her hand opening and closing, obviously unconsciously, in time with the overture, crumpling the program.
Prince Andrei, in saying this, was less than ever like that Bolkonsky who sat sprawled in Anna Pavlovna’s armchair and, narrowing his eyes, uttered French phrases through his teeth. His dry face was all aquiver with the nervous animation of every muscle; his eyes, in which the fire of life had seemed extinguished, now shone with a bright, radiant brilliance. One could see that, the more lifeless he seemed in ordinary times, the more energetic he was in moments of irritation.
“No, no, not a hair’s breadth,” Prince Vassily replied, laughing. “‘Sergei Kuzmich…from all sides. From all sides, Sergei Kuzmich.’ Poor Vyazmitinov just couldn’t get any further. He took up the letter several more times, but as soon as he said ‘Sergei’…sobs…‘Ku…zmi…ch’—tears…and ‘from all sides’ was drowned in weeping, and he couldn’t go on. And again his handkerchief, and again ‘Sergei Kuzmich, from all sides,’ and tears…so that they finally asked someone else to read it.”
“Yes,” replied Shinshin. “He was in the Caucasus, ran away from there, and, they say, became minister to some reigning prince in Persia, and killed the shah’s brother there. Well, so all the Moscow ladies are losing their minds! Dolochoff le Persan,  and all’s said. Now no word is spoken among us without Dolokhov; they swear by him, they invite people for him as if he was a sterlet,” said Shinshin. “Dolokhov and Anatole Kuragin have driven all our ladies out of their minds.”
“Well, what is this, gentlemen?” the staff officer said in a tone of reproach, like a man who has already repeated the same thing several times. “You can’t absent yourselves like this. The prince ordered that nobody should be found here. Well, take you, Mister Staff Captain,” he addressed a small, dirty, thin artillery officer, who was standing bootless before the entering men (he had given his boots to the sutler to dry), just in his stockings, smiling not quite naturally.
The sovereign’s indecision lasted only a moment. The sovereign’s foot, in the narrow, sharp toe of its boot, as they wore them then, touched the belly of the bobtailed bay mare he was riding; the sovereign’s hand in its white glove picked up the reins, and he set off, accompanied by a disorderly swaying sea of adjutants. He rode further and further, stopping by other regiments, and at last Rostov could only see his white plumes beyond the suite that surrounded the emperors.
At dinner, seating Balashov beside him, he treated him not only benignly but as if he counted Balashov among his courtiers, among the people who sympathized with his plans and were supposed to be glad of his successes. Among other subjects, he talked about Moscow and began to ask Balashov about the Russian capital, not merely as a curious traveler asks about a new place he intends to visit, but as if convinced that Balashov, as a Russian, must be flattered by his curiosity.
Il m’est impossible de trouver des termes pour vous exprimer mon m&#233;contentement. Vous ne commandez que mon avant-garde et vous n’avez pas le droit de faire d’armistice sans mon ordre. Vous me faites perdre le fruit d’une campagne. Rompez l’armistice sur-le-champ et marchez &#224; l’ennemi. Vous lui ferez d&#233;clarer, que le g&#233;n&#233;ral qui a sign&#233; cette capitulation, n’avait pas le droit de le faire, qu’il n’y a que l’Empereur de Russie qui ait ce droit.
“And I love her, because she has a sensible character—a very good one. Take the other sister—same family, but something quite different, an unpleasant character, and none of that intelligence, and all that, you know?…It’s unpleasant…But my fianc&#233;e…You must come to…” Berg went on; he was about to say “to dinner,” but changed his mind and said “to tea,” and with a quick movement of his tongue let out a small, round smoke ring that fully embodied his dreams of happiness.
“De Bal-mach&#232;ve!”  said the king (overcoming by his resoluteness the difficulty that the colonel was faced with), “charm&#233; de faire votre connaissance, g&#233;n&#233;ral,” ‡399 he added with a gesture of kingly graciousness. As soon as the king began to speak loudly and quickly, all his kingly dignity instantly left him, and, not noticing it himself, he went over to his proper tone of good-natured familiarity. He placed his hand on the withers of Balashov’s horse.
“Yes, in this room, four days ago, Wintzingerode and Stein conferred,” Napoleon went on with the same mocking, confident smile. “What I can’t understand,” he said, “is that the emperor Alexander made all these personal enemies of mine his intimates. That I don’t…understand. Didn’t he reflect that I might do the same?” He turned to Balashov with this question, and the recollection evidently pushed him back onto the track of his morning’s wrath, which was still fresh in him.
Zhilinsky clearly took this new Russian person into his circle without any joy and said nothing to Rostov. Boris seemed not to notice the constraint caused by the appearance of a new person and, with the same agreeable calm and veiling of the eyes with which he had met Rostov, tried to enliven the conversation. One of the Frenchmen turned with habitual French politeness to the stubbornly silent Rostov and said to him that he had probably come to Tilsit to see the emperor.
Prince Ippolit went over to the little princess and, bringing his face down close to hers, began saying something to her in a half whisper. Two footmen, one the princess’s, the other his, waiting for them to finish talking, stood with shawl and redingote and listened to their French talk, which they could not understand, with such faces as if they understood what was being said but did not want to show it. The princess, as usual, talked smilingly and listened laughingly.
“Yes, true for you,” the countess went on. “Up to now, thank God, I’ve been a friend to my children and have enjoyed their full trust,” said the countess, repeating the error of many parents who suppose that their children have no secrets from them. “I know that I’ll always be my daughters’ first confidente  and that if Nikolenka, with his fiery character, gets up to some mischief (boys can’t do without it), it still won’t be the same as with these Petersburg gentlemen.”
Boris came to the Rostovs’ box, received their felicitations with great simplicity and, raising his eyebrows, with a distracted smile, conveyed to Natasha and Sonya his fianc&#233;e’s request that they be present at her wedding, and left. Natasha spoke to him with a merry and flirtatious smile, and offered to that same Boris with whom she had once been in love her felicitations on his marriage. In the state of inebriation she was in, everything seemed simple and natural.
“Here’s how,” Nikolai replied. “You told me it depends on me. I don’t like Anna Mikhailovna, and I don’t like Boris, but they’ve been our friends and they’re poor. So here’s how!” and he tore up the note, and this action caused the old countess to burst into tears of joy. After that the young Rostov, not entering into such business anymore, with passionate enthusiasm took up the occupation, new for him, of hunting with dogs, which the old count managed on a grand scale.
Prince Andrei kept glancing with a smile now at Pierre, now at the viscount, now at the hostess. For the first moment of Pierre’s outburst, Anna Pavlovna was horrified, accustomed though she was to society; but when she saw that despite the blasphemous speeches uttered by Pierre, the viscount did not lose his temper, and when she became certain that it was now impossible to suppress these speeches, she gathered her forces and, joining the viscount, attacked the orator.
Mlle Bourienne and the little princess had to confess to themselves that as she was Princess Marya looked very bad, worse than ever; but it was already late. She looked at them with that expression they knew, an expression of thought and sadness. This expression did not inspire any fear of Princess Marya in them. (She never inspired that feeling in anyone.) But they knew that when that expression appeared on her face, she became silent and unshakeable in her decisions.
Though Nikolai Rostov, keeping firmly to his intention, went on serving in an obscure regiment, spending comparatively little money, the way of life at Otradnoe was such, and Mitenka in particular so conducted business, that the debts mounted irresistibly every year. The only help the old count could evidently envisage was government service, and he went to Petersburg to seek a post; to seek a post and at the same time, as he said, to amuse the girls for the last time.
Rostov had become a bluff, good-natured fellow, whom his Moscow acquaintances would have found slightly mauvais genre, *354 but who was loved and respected by his comrades, subordinates, and superiors, and who was content with his life. Lately—that is, in 1809—in letters from home, he often found complaints from his mother that their affairs were falling into worse and worse disorder, and that it was time for him to come home, to bring joy and peace to his old parents.
Pierre was thinking about Prince Andrei, that he was unhappy, that he was mistaken, that he did not know the true light, that Pierre had come to his aid, to enlighten him and raise him up. But as soon as Pierre thought of how and what he was going to say, he had the feeling that Prince Andrei would discredit his entire teaching with a single word, a single argument, and he was afraid to begin, afraid to expose his favorite, sacred thing to the possibility of ridicule.
Princess Marya’s embarrassment for her people  was totally unnecessary. They were not in the least intimidated. The little old woman, her eyes lowered and casting sidelong glances at the newcomers, turned her teacup bottom up on the saucer and, placing the nibbled piece of sugar beside it, sat calm and motionless in her armchair, waiting to be offered more tea. Ivanushka, sipping from the saucer, looked at the young men from under his brows with his sly feminine eyes.
“Yes, maybe I do love a poor girl,” Nikolai said to himself, “and what, should I sacrifice my feeling and honor for money? I’m surprised that mama could say it to me. Because Sonya’s poor,” he thought, “does it mean I can’t love her, can’t respond to her faithful, devoted love? And I’d surely be happier with her than with some doll of a Julie. I can’t command my feelings,” he said to himself. “If I love Sonya, my feeling is stronger and higher than everything for me.”
Nothing save honor could keep me from returning to the country. But now, before the opening of the campaign, I would consider myself dishonorable not only before all my comrades, but also before my own self, if I were to prefer happiness to my duty and love for the fatherland. But this is our last separation. Believe me, right after the war, if I am alive and you still love me, I will abandon everything and come flying to you, to press you forever to my ardent breast.
“Let him search,” she said to herself. As soon as Boris left, the flushed Sonya came from the other door, whispering something spitefully through her tears. Natasha restrained her first impulse to rush out to her and remained in her ambush, as if under the cap of invisibility, observing what went on in the world. She experienced a special new pleasure. Sonya was whispering something and kept looking back at the door of the drawing room. Nikolai came out of that door.
But instead of all that, here he was—the rich husband of an unfaithful wife, a retired gentleman-in-waiting, who liked to eat, drink, and, unbuttoning himself, to denounce the government a little, a member of the Moscow English Club, and a universally beloved member of Moscow society. For a long time he could not reconcile himself to the thought that he was that very same retired Moscow gentleman-in-waiting the type of which he had so deeply despised seven years ago.
Old Prince Nikolai Andreich Bolkonsky received a letter from Prince Vassily in December 1805, informing him of his arrival together with his son. (“I am going to an inspection, and, of course, for me seventy miles is no detour if I can visit you, my much-esteemed benefactor,” he wrote, “and my Anatole is keeping me company on his way to the army; and I hope you will allow him personally to express the deep respect which he, in imitation of his father, has for you.”)
At the beginning of 1806, Nikolai Rostov came home on leave. Denisov also went home to Voronezh, and Rostov persuaded him to come with him as far as Moscow and stay in their house. At the next to last posting station, Denisov met a friend, drank three bottles of wine with him, and, despite the bumps of the road, did not wake up all the way, lying on the bottom of the horse-drawn sleigh beside Rostov, who became more and more impatient the closer they came to Moscow.
“Where?” asked Bolkonsky. “I beg your pardon,” he said, turning to the baron, “we can finish this conversation elsewhere—at a ball one must dance.” He stepped forward, in the direction Pierre had indicated to him. Natasha’s desperate, rapt face caught Prince Andrei’s eye. He recognized her, guessed her feeling, realized that she was a d&#233;butante, remembered her conversation on the window ledge, and with a merry expression on his face went up to Countess Rostov.
Despite the large quantity of pills, drops, and powders she had swallowed, from little jars and boxes of which Madame Schoss, a great lover of such objects, had assembled a large collection, despite the absence of her accustomed country life, youth had its way: Natasha’s grief began to be covered over by the impressions of ongoing life, it ceased to weigh with such tormenting pain on her heart, it began to become the past, and Natasha started to recover physically.
“They’re perfect ruffians, especially Dolokhov,” said the guest. “He’s the son of Marya Ivanovna Dolokhov, such a respectable lady, and what then? Can you imagine: the three of them found a bear somewhere, put it in the carriage with them, and went to the actresses. The police came running to quiet them down. They took a policeman and tied him back to back with the bear, and threw the bear into the Moika. So the bear goes swimming about with the policeman on him.”
Berg always spoke very precisely, calmly, and courteously. His conversation was always concerned with himself alone; he always kept calmly silent when the talk was about something that had no direct relation to himself. And he could be silent like that for several hours, without experiencing in himself or causing in others the slightest embarrassment. But as soon as the conversation concerned him personally, he began to speak expansively and with obvious pleasure.
Prince Andrei could see that the officer was in the sort of drunken fit of senseless rage when people do not know what they are saying. He could see that his intercession for the doctor’s wife in the kibitka was replete with what he feared most in the world, with what is known as ridicule. *216 But his instinct told him otherwise. Before the officer had time to finish his last words, Prince Andrei, his face disfigured with rage, rode up to him and raised his whip:
“To the health of our sovereign emperor!” he cried, and at the same moment his kindly eyes grew moist with tears of joy and rapture. At that same moment, the “Thunder of victory resound” was played. They all rose from their seats and shouted “Hurrah!” Bagration, too, shouted “Hurrah!” in the same voice in which he had shouted on the field of Sch&#246;ngraben. Young Rostov’s rapturous voice could be heard above the other three hundred voices. He was almost weeping.
“J’ai le plus vif d&#233;sir,” &#233;crit le Roi de Prusse &#224; Bonaparte, “que V. M. soit accueillie et trait&#233;e dans mon palais d’une mani&#232;re, qui lui soit agr&#233;able et c’est avec empressement, que j’ai pris &#224; cet effet toutes les mesures que les circonstances me permettaient. Puisse-je avoir r&#233;ussi!” Les g&#233;n&#233;raux Prussiens se piquent de politesse envers les Fran&#231;ais et mettent bas les armes aux premi&#232;res sommations.
The old count, knowing his son’s hunting ardor, hurried so as not to be late, and before the kennelmen managed to reach their places, Ilya Andreich, merry, red-cheeked, with quivering jowls, drove up with his black horses across the green winter wheat to the covert left for him, and having straightened his fur jacket and put on his hunting gear, mounted his sleek, well-fed, placid, and kind Viflyanka, gone as gray as himself. The horses and droshky were sent away.
“Adorable, divin, d&#233;licieux!” *383 came from all sides. Natasha looked at the fat George, but heard nothing, saw and understood nothing of what went on before her; she only felt herself again quite irretrievably in that strange, insane world, so far from her former one, that world in which it was impossible to know what was good, what was bad, what was sane and what insane. Behind her sat Anatole, and she, sensing his nearness, waited fearfully for something.
After all that Napoleon had said to him, after those outbursts of wrath, and after those last drily spoken words—“Je ne vous retiens plus, g&#233;n&#233;ral, vous recevrez ma lettre” —Balashov was convinced that Napoleon not only would not wish to see him, but would try not to see him—the envoy he had insulted and, moreover, the witness to his unseemly vehemence. But, to his surprise, Balashov received that day, through Duroc, an invitation to the emperor’s table.
With that the anecdote ended. Though it was not clear why he had told it, and why it absolutely had to be told in Russian, all the same Anna Pavlovna and the others appreciated Prince Ippolit’s social grace, in thus pleasantly putting an end to M’sieur Pierre’s unpleasant and ungracious outburst. After the anecdote, the conversation broke up into small, insignificant commentaries on past and future balls, on performances, and on who would see whom when and where.
On the eleventh of October, 1805, one of the infantry regiments just arrived in Braunau had halted half a mile from the town, waiting to be reviewed by the commander in chief. Despite the non-Russian locality and surroundings—orchards, stone walls, tile roofs, mountains visible in the distance—and the non-Russian folk gazing with curiosity at the soldiers, the regiment looked exactly the same as any Russian regiment waiting for review somewhere in central Russia.
“And then, what am I to ask the sovereign about his orders for the right flank, when it is now past three in the afternoon and the battle is lost? No, decidedly, I should not approach him, should not disturb his thoughts. Better to die a thousand times than to get a bad look or a bad opinion from him,” Rostov decided and rode away with sorrow and despair in his heart, constantly turning to look at the sovereign, still standing in the same attitude of indecision.
Soon after Prince Andrei’s return, the old prince separated his son’s share of the inheritance and gave him Bogucharovo, a large estate thirty miles from Bald Hills. Partly on account of the painful memories connected with Bald Hills, partly because Prince Andrei did not always feel able to bear calmly with his father’s character, and partly because he needed solitude, Prince Andrei took advantage of Bogucharovo, began building, and spent most of his time there.
“After Austerlitz!” Prince Andrei said gloomily. “No, I humbly thank you, I promised myself that I would not serve in the active Russian army. And I won’t. If Bonaparte was camped here in Smolensk, threatening Bald Hills, even then I wouldn’t serve in the Russian army. Well, as I was saying,” Prince Andrei went on, calming down. “Now it’s the militia, my father is commander in chief of the third district, and my only means of avoiding service is to be with him.”
The father received the son’s communication with outward calm, but with inner spite. He could not understand why anyone would want to change his life, to introduce anything new into it, when for him life was already over. “Only let me live out my life as I want, and then they can do what they want,” the old man said to himself. With his son, however, he used the diplomacy he made use of on important occasions. Assuming a calm tone, he discussed the whole matter:
“Devil take them, these muzhiks, and money, and carrying over to the next page,” he thought. “I used to understand something about doubling on a six-card run, but about carrying over on pages I know nothing,” he said to himself, and from then on he did not enter into the business anymore. Only once the countess summoned her son, informed him that she had a promissory note for two thousand from Anna Mikhailovna, and asked Nikolai how he thought of acting upon it.
But as a young man in love trembles and thrills, not daring to utter what he dreams of by night, and looks about fearfully, seeking help or the possibility of delay and flight, when the desired moment comes and he stands alone with her, so now Rostov, having attained what he desired more than anything in the world, did not know how to approach the sovereign and presented thousands of considerations to himself for why it was unsuitable, improper, and impossible.
“I beg your pardon! I beg your pardon! As God is my witness, I didn’t know,” the old man muttered, and, having looked Natasha up and down, he left. Mlle Bourienne was the first to recover after this apparition and began talking about the prince’s ill health. Natasha and Princess Marya silently looked at each other, and the longer they looked at each other silently, without saying what they needed to say, the more ill-willed were their thoughts about each other.
Some forty uhlans drowned in the river, despite the boats that were sent to help. Most of the men were washed back to this side. The colonel and several other men crossed the river and barely managed to climb out on the bank. But as soon as they climbed out, their streaming wet clothes sticking to them, they shouted “Vivat!” —gazing rapturously at the spot where Napoleon had stood, but where he no longer was, and at that moment they considered themselves happy.
Rostov stood not far from the trumpeters, and with his keen-sighted eyes he recognized the sovereign from afar and followed his approach. When the sovereign had approached to within twenty paces, and Nikolai could make out clearly, in all its details, the handsome, young, and happy face of the emperor, he experienced a feeling of tenderness and rapture such as he had never experienced before. Every feature, every movement of the sovereign seemed lovely to him.
“I have the pleasure of being acquainted, if the countess remembers me,” said Prince Andrei, with a courteous and low bow, totally contradicting Mme Peronsky’s remark about his rudeness, going up to Natasha and raising his arm to put it around her waist even before he finished asking her to dance. He suggested a turn of the waltz. That rapt expression of Natasha’s face, ready for despair and for ecstasy, suddenly lit up with a happy, grateful, childlike smile.
Having read the letter, Natasha sat down at the desk to write a reply. “Ch&#232;re Princesse!”  she wrote quickly and mechanically, and stopped. What could she write after all that had happened yesterday? “Yes, yes, all that was, and now it’s all different,” she thought, sitting over the started letter. “Must I refuse him? Must I really? It’s terrible!…” And, so as not to think those dreadful thoughts, she went to Sonya and began sorting out patterns with her.
“Very nice! What a horse he’ll be!” he said to himself and, smiling and holding his saber, ran up the steps, his spurs jingling. The German landlord, in a vest and a cap, holding the fork he was using to clear away dung, peeked out of the cowshed. As soon as he saw Rostov, the German’s face suddenly brightened. He smiled merrily and winked: “Sch&#246;n, gut Morgen! Sch&#246;n, gut Morgen!” *182 he repeated, obviously taking pleasure in greeting the young man.
“In our temples we know no other distinctions,” the grand master read, “than those between virtue and vice. Beware of making any distinction that may violate equality. Fly to aid your brother, whoever he may be, instruct him who errs, raise up the fallen, and never nurse any malice or enmity against your brother. Be gentle and affable. Arouse the fire of virtue in all hearts. Share your happiness with your neighbor, and let envy never cloud this pure delight.
Kutuzov did not reply. He seemed to have forgotten what he had said, and sat deep in thought. After five minutes, rocking smoothly on the soft springs of the carriage, Kutuzov turned to Prince Andrei. There was no trace of emotion on his face. With fine irony he questioned the prince about the details of his meeting with the emperor, about the opinions he had heard at court concerning the action at Krems, and about several women of their mutual acquaintance.
H&#233;l&#232;ne’s face became frightful; she shrieked and sprang away from him. His father’s blood told in him. Pierre felt the enthusiasm and enchantment of rage. He threw down the slab, broke it, and, approaching H&#233;l&#232;ne with widespread arms, shouted “Out!” in such a frightful voice that everybody in the house was terrified on hearing this shout. God knows what Pierre would have done at that moment if H&#233;l&#232;ne had not run out of the room.
Anatole, whom he had been seeking, dined that day at Dolokhov’s and discussed with him how to mend the spoiled affair. It seemed necessary to him that he see Miss Rostov. In the evening, he went to his sister’s, to discuss with her the means of arranging this meeting. When Pierre, having driven in vain all over Moscow, returned home, the valet told him that Prince Anatole Vassilievich was with the countess. The countess’s drawing room was filled with guests.
The old prince was also awake. Tikhon, through his sleep, heard him pacing about angrily and snorting through his nose. It seemed to the old prince that he was offended for his daughter. The offense was most painful because it concerned not himself but another, his daughter, whom he loved more than himself. He told himself that he would think over the whole matter again and find what was fair and ought to be done, but instead he only irritated himself more.
Having cleared the road, Denisov stopped at the entrance to the bridge. Casually holding back his stallion, who was straining towards his fellows and stamping his foot, he looked at the squadron that was moving towards him. The transparent sounds of hooves rang out on the planks of the bridge, as if several horses were galloping, and the squadron, with officers in front, four men abreast, stretched across the bridge and began to come out on the other side.
An hour later all the costumes were crumpled and disordered. The burnt cork mustaches and eyebrows were smeared over sweaty, flushed, and merry faces. Pelageya Danilovna began to recognize the mummers, admired how well the costumes had been made, how they especially suited the young ladies, and thanked them all for entertaining her so well. The guests were invited for supper in the drawing room, and food was arranged for the servants in the reception room.
It was past three o’clock in the afternoon when Prince Andrei, who had persuaded Kutuzov to grant his request, arrived in Grunt and went to Bagration. Bonaparte’s adjutant had not yet reached Murat’s division, and the battle had not yet begun. In Bagration’s division, nothing was known about the general course of affairs; they talked of peace, but did not believe in its possibility. They talked of battle and also did not believe in the nearness of battle.
“Dolokhov, Marya Ivanovna’s son,” she said in a mysterious whisper, “they say he has totally compromised her. He introduced him, invited him to his house in Petersburg, and now…She has come here, and that daredevil after her,” said Anna Mikhailovna, wishing to express her sympathy for Pierre, but by involuntary intonations and a half smile expressing her sympathy for the daredevil, as she called Dolokhov. “They say Pierre is totally crushed by his grief.”
In Dolokhov’s big study, its walls decorated up to the ceiling with Persian rugs, bearskins, and weapons, sat Dolokhov, in a traveling jacket and boots, before an open bureau on which lay an abacus and wads of money. Anatole, in an unbuttoned uniform, paced from the room where the witnesses sat, through the study, into the back room, where his French valet and others were packing the last of his belongings. Dolokhov was counting money and writing it down.
“Now we’ve done it!” he said. “See, I told you, Mikhailo Mitrich, if it’s on the march, then it’s greatcoats,” he turned reproachfully to the battalion commander. “Ah, my God!” he added and resolutely stepped forward. “Company commanders!” he cried in a voice accustomed to command. “Sergeant majors!…How soon will he come?” he turned to the adjutant with an expression of deferential politeness which evidently related to the person of whom he was speaking.
“She’s ravishing, isn’t she?” she said to Pierre, pointing to the majestic beauty as she sailed off. “Et quelle tenue! ‡228 What tact for such a young girl, and what a masterly ability to behave! It comes from the heart. Happy the one to whom she will belong! With her even the most unworldly husband will involuntarily and effortlessly occupy a brilliant place in society. Isn’t that so? I only wanted to know your opinion.” And Anna Pavlovna let Pierre go.
Only Countess Elena Vassilievna, considering the company of some sort of Bergs humiliating to her, could be so cruel as to refuse such an invitation. Berg explained so clearly why he wished to gather a small and good company at his place, and why this would be a pleasure for him, and why he would be sorry to spend money on cards or on something bad, but on good company he was ready to suffer the expense, that Pierre could not refuse and promised to come.
Sonya grieved both at being parted from Nikolai and still more at the hostile tone with which the countess could not help treating her. The count was more preoccupied than ever with the bad state of his affairs, which called for some decisive measures. It was necessary to sell the Moscow house and nearby estate, and to sell the house it was necessary to go to Moscow. But because of the countess’s health, they had to put off the departure from day to day.
They had just ridden up a hill past a tavern, when a bunch of horsemen appeared, riding towards them from the foot of the hill, at the head of whom, on a black horse, its trappings gleaming in the sun, rode a tall man in a plumed hat, with black, curled, shoulder-length hair, in a red mantle, his long legs thrust forward, as Frenchmen ride. This man galloped to meet Balashov, his plumes flying, his jewels and gold galloons shining in the bright June sun.
Such passion, the passion of creative contemplation, Tolstoy constantly carried within him. It was precisely in its light that he saw everything in its pristine freshness, in a new way, as if for the first time. The authenticity of what he saw differs so much from what we are used to that it may appear strange to us. But Tolstoy was not seeking that strangeness, was not pursuing it as a goal, still less did he apply it to his works as a literary method.
Prince Andrei, having reached the front line, rode along it. Our line and the enemy’s stood far from each other on the left and right flanks, but in the center, where the envoys had passed that morning, the lines came so close that the men could see each other’s faces and talk to each other. Besides the soldiers who occupied the line at that place, many of the curious stood on both sides and gazed, laughing, at their strange and foreign-looking enemies.
“I said it first thing,” Anna Pavlovna would say of Pierre, “I said at once then and before everyone else” (she insisted on her priority), “that he is a crazy young man, spoiled by the depraved ideas of our time. I said it back when everyone admired him, and he had just come from abroad and, remember, played some sort of Marat at one of my soir&#233;es. And how did it end? Even then I didn’t want this marriage, and predicted everything that’s happened.”
“Spring, and love, and happiness!” the oak seemed to say. “And how is it you’re not bored with the same stupid, senseless deception! Always the same, and always a deception! There is no spring, no sun, no happiness. Look, there sit those smothered, dead fir trees, always the same; look at me spreading my broken, flayed fingers wherever they grow—from my back, from my sides. As they’ve grown, so I stand, and I don’t believe in your hopes and deceptions.”
On coming home in the evening, he would jot down in his notebook four or five necessary visits or rendez-vous  at appointed hours. The mechanism of life, the ordering of the day so as to get everywhere on time, took the greater part of the very energy of life. He did not do anything, he did not even think about anything and had no time to think, but only talked, and talked successfully, about what he had had time to think over previously in the country.
Pierre, as one of the most honored guests, had to sit down to Boston with Ilya Andreevich, the general, and the colonel. At the Boston table, Pierre happened to sit facing Natasha, and he was struck by the odd change that had taken place in her since the day of the ball. Natasha was silent and not only was not as beautiful as she had been at the ball, but would even have been plain if she had not had such look of meekness and indifference to everything.
Though nothing had yet been said between Anatole and Mlle Bourienne, they understood each other perfectly in regard to the first part of the romance, before the appearance of the pauvre m&#232;re,  understood that they had much to tell each other in secret, and therefore in the morning they both sought an occasion to see each other alone. When Princess Marya went at the usual hour to see her father, Mlle Bourienne met with Anatole in the winter garden.
Though five minutes earlier Prince Andrei had been able to say a few words to the soldiers transporting him, now, with his eyes fixed directly on Napoleon, he was silent…To him at that moment all the interests that occupied Napoleon seemed so insignificant, his hero himself seemed so petty to him, with his petty vanity and joy in victory, compared with that lofty, just, and kindly sky, which he had seen and understood, that he was unable to answer him.
The doctor came every day, felt her pulse, looked at her tongue, and joked with her, paying no attention to her grief-stricken face. On the other hand, when he went out to the other room, the countess hurriedly followed him, and he, assuming a serious air and shaking his head pensively, said that, although there was danger, he had hopes for the effectiveness of this latest medicine, and that they must wait and see; that the illness was more moral, but…
“Before my eyes,” wrote Kutuzov, “your son, with a standard in his hands, at the head of a regiment, fell as a hero worthy of his father and his fatherland. To the general regret of myself and the entire army, it is still unknown whether he is alive or not. I flatter myself and you with the hope that your son is alive, for otherwise he would be among the officers found on the battlefield and his name would be on the list given me by the peace envoys.”
Nikolai turned away from her. Natasha, with her sensitivity, also instantly noticed her brother’s state. She noticed it, but she felt so merry herself at that moment, she was so far from grief, sorrow, reproach, that she purposely deceived herself (as often happens with young people). “No, I’m too merry now to spoil my merriment by sympathy for someone else’s grief,” she felt and said to herself: “No, I’m surely mistaken, he must be as merry as I am.”
“Why can’t it be both together?” she thought in moments of total darkening. “Only then would I be perfectly happy, but now I must make a choice, and I can’t be happy without either of them. The thing is,” she thought, “that it’s equally impossible to tell Prince Andrei what has happened or to conceal it. While with this one  nothing’s spoiled. But can I really part forever with the happiness of loving Prince Andrei, which I’ve lived with for so long?”
When Natasha left the drawing room and ran off, she ran no further than the conservatory. In that room she stopped, listening to the talk in the drawing room and waiting for Boris to come out. She was already growing impatient and, stamping her little foot, was about to cry because he did not come at once, when she heard the neither slow nor quick, but proper footsteps of the young man. Natasha quickly darted among the tubs of plants and hid herself.
“What’s the matter with her?” Pierre wondered, glancing at her. She was sitting beside her sister at the tea table and replied reluctantly, without looking at him, to something Boris said as he sat down by her. Having gone through a whole suit and taken five tricks, much to his partner’s delight, Pierre, who heard an exchange of greetings and the sound of someone’s footsteps coming into the room as he was gathering in his tricks, looked at her again.
“The one thing that’s hard for me—to tell you the truth, Andr&#233;—is father’s way of thinking in the religious respect. I don’t understand how a man with such an enormous intellect cannot see what is clear as day and can be so deluded. That constitutes my one unhappiness. But here, too, I’ve seen a shade of improvement recently. His mockery recently hasn’t been so biting, and there’s a monk whom he received and with whom he spoke for a long time.”
Before he reached the still-unfinished fortification, he saw horsemen moving towards him in the evening light of the gray, autumnal day. The foremost, in a felt cloak and peaked astrakhan cap, was riding a white horse. It was Prince Bagration. Prince Andrei stopped to wait for him. Prince Bagration reined in his horse and, recognizing Prince Andrei, nodded to him. He went on looking ahead all the while Prince Andrei was telling him what he had seen.
“The famous Duport, the ballet master—you haven’t seen him? Then you won’t understand. Here’s what I am.” Natasha rounded her arms, took up her skirt as if to dance, ran a few steps, turned, made an entrechat, tapped her foot against her ankle, and went a few steps on the very tips of her toes. “See me standing? So there!” she said; but she could not hold it. “That’s what I am! I’ll never marry anyone, I’ll become a dancer. Only don’t tell anybody.”
Prince Andrei arrived at the quarters of General Bennigsen, who occupied a small manor house right on the bank of the river. Neither Bennigsen nor the sovereign was there; but Chernyshov, the imperial adjutant, received Bolkonsky and announced to him that the sovereign had ridden with General Bennigsen and Marquis Paulucci to make a second round of the fortifications of the Drissa camp, the suitability of which had become a subject of strong doubts.
While on campaign, Rostov allowed himself the liberty of riding a Cossack horse instead of a regimental one. A fancier and a hunter, he had recently obtained for himself a fine, big, dashing Don horse, light chestnut with a white mane and tail, on which no one could outgallop him. It was a pleasure for Rostov to ride this horse. He thought about the horse, about the morning, about the doctor’s wife, and never once thought about the impending danger.
“Why are you silent, mon cousin? ” the princess suddenly shouted so loudly that the people in the drawing room heard and were frightened by her voice. “Why are you silent, when here God knows who allows herself to interfere and make scenes on a dying’s man’s threshold? Intriguer!” she whispered spitefully and tugged at the portfolio with all her might, but Anna Mikhailovna went a few steps so as not to let go of the portfolio, and shifted her grip.
He closed his eyes, but at that same instant in his ears there crackled a cannonade, gunfire, the rattle of carriage wheels, and now again the stretched-out line of musketeers goes down the hill, and the French are shooting, and he feels his heart thrill, and he is riding in front next to Schmidt, and bullets are whistling merrily around him, and he experiences that feeling of the tenfold joy of life, such as he has not experienced since childhood.
Two of the Pavlogradsky squadrons made their bivouac in the middle of a rye field, already in ear but totally trampled down by cattle and horses. It was pouring rain, and Rostov, with the young officer Ilyin, whom he patronized, was sitting under a hastily slapped-together lean-to. An officer of their regiment, with long mustaches that continued across his cheeks, who was coming back from the staff and got caught by the rain, stopped to see Rostov.
“No, promise me you won’t refuse. It won’t be any trouble for you, and there won’t be anything in it that’s unworthy of you. Only you’ll comfort me. Promise, Andryusha,” she said, putting her hand into her reticule and taking hold of something in it, but not showing it yet, as if what she was holding constituted the object of her request, and before she got his promise to fulfill her request, she could not take this something  out of her reticule.
Having snapped out these last words in soldierly fashion and waved his arms as if throwing something on the ground, the drummer, a lean and handsome soldier of about forty, sternly looked the soldier-singers over and narrowed his eyes. Then, making sure that all eyes were aimed at him, he raised his arms as if carefully lifting some invisible precious object over his head, held it there for a few seconds, and all at once desperately threw it down:
“Well, I tell you what, gentlemen,” said Bilibin, “Bolkonsky is a guest in my house and here in Br&#252;nn, and I want to treat him, as far as I can, to all the joys of life here. If we were in Vienna, that would be easy; but here, dans ce vilain trou morave  it’s harder, and I ask you all to help. Il faut lui faire les honneurs de Br&#252;nn. *207 You’ll take the theater upon yourselves, I’ll take society, and you, Ippolit, naturally, the women.”
The concentrated movement which began that morning in the emperors’ headquarters and gave a push to all subsequent movement was like the first movement of the central wheel in a big tower clock. Slowly one wheel started, another turned, a third, and the wheels, pulleys, and gears were set turning more and more quickly, chimes began to ring, figures popped out, and the clock hands started their measured advance, showing the result of that movement.
“Then allow me to convey your regrets, and I’m certain that our adversaries will agree to accept your apology,” said Nesvitsky (like the other participants in the affair, and like everyone in similar affairs, not believing that things would go so far as an actual duel). “You know, Count, it’s much more noble to acknowledge your mistake than to bring the matter to a point beyond repair…There was no offense on either side. Allow me to talk it over…”
“It’s all over,” he thought, and cold sweat broke out on his forehead. Bewildered, he went over to the crib, certain that he would find it empty, that the nanny was hiding the dead baby. He opened the curtain, and for a time his frightened, unfocused eyes could not find the baby. At last he saw him: the red-cheeked boy lay sprawled across the crib, his head lower than the pillow, smacking and moving his lips in his sleep, and breathing regularly.
“In the beginning I didn’t like it much, because what is it that makes a city pleasant? Ce sont les jolies femmes, *376 isn’t that so? Well, but now I like it very much,” he said, looking at her meaningfully. “Will you come to this carousel, Countess? Please do come,” he said and, reaching his hand out to her bouquet and lowering his voice, he said: “Vous serez la plus jolie. Venez, ch&#232;re comtesse, et comme gage donnez-moi cette fleur.” †377
“Since last evening my fate is sealed: to be loved by you or to die. I have no other way out,” the letter began. Then he wrote that he knew the family would not give her to him, that there were secret reasons for that which he could reveal only to her, but that if she loved him, she had only to say the word “yes” and no human powers would prevent their bliss. Love would overcome all. He would abduct her and carry her off to the ends of the earth.
Being an enthusiast had become her social position, and she sometimes became enthusiastic even when she had no wish to, so as not to deceive the expectations of people who knew her. The restrained smile that constantly played on Anna Pavlovna’s face, though it did not suit her outworn features, expressed, as it does in spoiled children, a constant awareness of her dear shortcoming, which she did not wish, could not, and found no need to correct.
“You think so?…” said Anna Pavlovna, in order to say something, and again turned to her duties as mistress of the house, but Pierre committed the reverse discourtesy. Earlier he had walked away without hearing out a lady who was talking to him; now he held with his conversation a lady who needed to leave him. Lowering his head and spreading his big feet, he began to explain to Anna Pavlovna why he thought that the abb&#233;’s plan was a chimera.
He wanted to resolve it, but felt with terror that in this case he lacked the resolve that he knew he had and that indeed was in him. Pierre was one of those people who are strong only when they feel themselves perfectly pure. And since the day when he had been possessed by that feeling of desire which he had experienced over the snuffbox at Anna Pavlovna’s, an unconscious feeling of guilt on account of that attraction had paralyzed his resolve.
Nikolai dismounted and stood by the hounds with Natasha and Petya, who joined him, waiting for news of how the matter would end. The hunter who had been fighting left the edge of the woods with the fox strapped to his saddle and rode over to his young master. He took off his hat while still some distance away and tried to speak respectfully; but he was pale, breathless, and his face was angry. He had a black eye, but he probably did not know it.
“She, she alone is to blame for everything, everything,” he said to himself. “But what of it? Why did I bind myself to her, why did I say that ‘Je vous aime’  to her, which was a lie, and still worse than a lie,” he said to himself. “I’m to blame and I must bear…But what? The disgrace to my name, the unhappiness of my life? Eh, it’s all nonsense,” he thought, “the disgrace to my name and honor—it’s all a convention, it’s all independent of me.”
“I must, I must have a talk with you,” said Prince Andrei. “You know those women’s gloves” (he meant the Masonic gloves which were given to a newly initiated brother to be presented to a beloved woman). “I…But no, I’ll talk with you later…” And Prince Andrei, with a strange gleam in his eyes and with uneasy movements, went over to Natasha and sat down beside her. Pierre saw how Prince Andrei asked her something, and she, blushing, answered him.
Napoleon met Balashov with a cheerful and benign air. Not only was there no expression in him of embarrassment or self-reproach for his morning’s outburst, but, on the contrary, he tried to encourage Balashov. Clearly it was Napoleon’s long-standing conviction that the possibility of mistakes did not exist for him, and to his mind everything he did was good, not because it agreed with any notion of what was good and bad, but because he  did it.
The countess was so tired out from the visits that she ordered no one else to be received, and the porter was told simply to be sure to invite for dinner everyone who came by with congratulations. The countess wanted to talk personally with her childhood friend, Princess Anna Mikhailovna, whom she had not seen properly since her return from Petersburg. Anna Mikhailovna, with her weepy and pleasant face, moved closer to the countess’s armchair.
Rostov felt ill-humored immediately after he noticed the displeasure on Boris’s face, and, as always happens with people who are ill-humored, it seemed to him that everyone was looking at him hostilely and that he was hampering them all. And indeed he was hampering them all and alone remained outside the newly initiated general conversation. “Why is he sitting here?” said the glances cast at him by the guests. He got up and went over to Boris.
Having sat at the table for a while, Speransky corked the wine bottle and saying: “Good wine costs a pretty penny these days,” handed it to the servant and got up. They all got up and with the same noisy talk went to the drawing room. Speransky was handed two envelopes brought by a courier. He took them and went to his study. As soon as he left, the general merriment died down, and the guests began talking sensibly and quietly with each other.
“Prince Auersperg is standing on this side, our side, and defending us; I suppose he’s defending us very poorly, but still he’s defending us. But Vienna is on the other side. No, the bridge has not yet been taken and, I hope, will not be taken, because it’s mined and there’s an order to blow it up. Otherwise we’d have been in the mountains of Bohemia long ago, and you and your army would have spent a bad quarter of an hour between two fires.”
“Will they set fire to it or won’t they? Who’ll be first? Will they run and set fire to the bridge, or will the French come within canister-shot range and kill them all?” These questions were involuntarily asked with sinking heart by each man of that large mass of troops which stood above the bridge and in the bright evening light looked at the bridge and the hussars and, on the other side, at the advancing blue coats with bayonets and guns.
“This one? Yes, she’s a good dog, a catcher,” Ilagin said in an indifferent voice of his red-spotted Yerza, for whom he had given his neighbor three families of house serfs a year before. “So with you, too, Count, there’s no boasting about flour production this year?” he continued the conversation. And, considering it polite to pay the young count back in kind, Ilagin looked over his dogs and picked out Milka, whose broadness struck his eye.
When, after a bachelor supper, with a sweet and kindly smile, yielding to the entreaties of the merry company, he got up to go with them, joyful, triumphant cries came from the young men. At balls he danced, if there was a need for partners. The young ladies and girls liked him, because, without paying court to anyone, he was equally amiable with them all, especially after supper. “Il est charmant, il n’a pas de sexe,” *358 they said of him.
Prince Pyotr Mikhailovich Volkonsky occupied a post as something like the sovereign’s chief of staff. Volkonsky came out of the study and, bringing maps to the drawing room and spreading them on the table, told the assembled gentlemen the questions on which he would like to hear their opinion. The thing was that during the night information had been received (subsequently proved false) that the French were moving to outflank the Drissa camp.
The princess did not fall, did not feel faint. She had been pale to begin with, but when she heard these words, her face changed and something lit up in her luminous, beautiful eyes. It was as if joy, the supreme joy, independent of the sorrows and joys of this world, poured over the deep sorrow that was in her. She forgot all her fear of her father, went up to him, took him by the hand, pulled him to her, and embraced his dry, sinewy neck.
“No, life isn’t over at the age of thirty-one,” Prince Andrei suddenly decided definitively, immutably. “It’s not enough that I know all that’s in me, everyone else must know it, too: Pierre, and that girl who wanted to fly into the sky, everyone must know me, so that my life is not only for myself; so that they don’t live like that girl, independently of my life, but so that it is reflected in everyone, and they all live together with me!”
Pierre, his shoulders hunched and his mouth gaping, listened to what Marya Dmitrievna was telling him and could not believe his ears. Prince Andrei’s fianc&#233;e, so deeply loved, this once sweet Natasha Rostov, to exchange Bolkonsky for that fool Anatole, who was already married (Pierre knew the secret of his marriage), and fall in love with him so much as to agree to elope with him!—that Pierre could not understand and could not imagine.
“Yes,” said the countess, when the ray of sunlight that had penetrated the room with the young generation vanished, and as if answering a question no one had asked her, but which constantly preoccupied her. “So much suffering, so much anxiety endured so as to rejoice in them now! And now, too, there’s really more fear than joy. One is afraid, always afraid! It’s precisely the age when there are so many dangers both for girls and for boys.”
“Soon you’ll have your people dressed in sarafans! What is that?” shouted the regimental commander, thrusting his lower jaw out and pointing to a soldier in the ranks of the third company who was wearing a greatcoat of blue factory broadcloth, different from the other greatcoats. “Where have you been? We’re expecting the commander in chief, and you leave your post? Eh?…I’ll teach you to dress your people in gaudy colors for a review!…Eh!…”
The old prince was extremely gentle and painstaking in dealing with his daughter that morning. Princess Marya knew this painstaking expression of her father’s very well. It was the expression he had on his face in the moments when his dry hands clenched into fists from vexation at Princess Marya’s not understanding a problem in arithmetic, and, getting up, he would step away from her and in a soft voice repeat the same words several times.
At first he heard the sounds of indifferent talk, then only the sound of Anna Mikhailovna’s voice making a long speech, then a cry, then silence, then both voices again, speaking together with joyful intonations, and then footsteps, and then Anna Mikhailovna opened the door to him. Anna Mikhailovna’s face bore the proud expression of a surgeon who has completed a difficult amputation and admits the public so that it can appreciate his art.
“Allez, mon ami,” *285 said Princess Marya. Prince Andrei went to his wife again and sat in the next room waiting. Some woman came out of the room with a frightened face and became embarrassed on seeing Prince Andrei. He covered his face with his hands and sat that way for several minutes. Pitiful, helplessly animal moans came from behind the door. Prince Andrei got up, went to the door, and wanted to open it. Someone was holding the door.
During the first period of his acquaintance with Speransky, Prince Andrei had a passionate feeling of admiration for him, resembling what he used to feel for Bonaparte. The circumstance that Speransky was a priest’s son whom stupid people could vulgarly despise, as many did, for being a little cleric and a “preacher’s brat,” made Prince Andrei treat his feeling for Speransky with special care and unconsciously strengthen it within himself.
“You see, I’ve known him for a long time, and I love Mashenka, your sister-in-law. A sister-in-law is a sharp claw, but this one wouldn’t hurt a fly. She’s asked me to get you together with her. You’ll go to her tomorrow with your father. Be nice and affectionate with her: you’re younger than she is. So your young man comes, and you’re already acquainted with his sister and father, and they love you. Am I right or not? Won’t it be better?”
“Listen, Prince,” she said, “I’ve never asked you for anything, and never will, I’ve never reminded you of my father’s friendship for you. But now, I adjure you in God’s name, do this for my son, and I will consider you my benefactor,” she added hastily. “No, don’t be angry, but promise me. I asked Golitsyn and he refused. Soyez le bon enfant que vous avez &#233;t&#233;, ”*47 she said, trying to smile, though there were tears in her eyes.
“She doesn’t care at all about my existence!” Prince Andrei thought all the while he was listening to her talk, for some reason expecting and fearing that she would say something about him. “And she again! As if on purpose!” he thought. In his soul there suddenly arose such an unexpected tangle of youthful thoughts and hopes, contradictory to his whole life, that, feeling himself unable to comprehend his own state, he fell asleep at once.
Three weeks went by that way. Natasha did not want to go anywhere and, like a shadow, idle and dejected, wandered through the rooms, in the evenings wept in secret from everybody, and did not go to her mother. She blushed constantly and was irritable. It seemed to her that everyone knew about her disappointment, was laughing at her, and pitied her. With all the strength of her inner grief, this grief of vanity intensified her unhappiness.
From all these parties, one more, the ninth party, emerged and began to raise its voice just as Prince Andrei came to the army. This was a party of older people, intelligent, experienced in statesmanship, and who were able, without sharing any of these contradictory opinions, to look at everything that went on at headquarters abstractly, and to reflect on the means of getting out of this uncertainty, irresolution, confusion, and weakness.
The princess, with her dry and straight waist, incongruously long for her legs, looked straight and passionlessly at the prince with her prominent gray eyes. She shook her head and, sighing, turned to look at the icons. Her gesture could have been interpreted either as an expression of sorrow and devotion, or as an expression of weariness and hope for a speedy repose. Prince Vassily interpreted this gesture as an expression of weariness.
His thin, drawn, yellowish face was all covered with deep wrinkles, which always looked as neatly and thoroughly washed as one’s fingertips after a bath. The movements of these wrinkles constituted the main play of his physiognomy. Now his forehead would wrinkle into wide folds as his eyebrows rose, then his eyebrows would descend and deep wrinkles would form on his cheeks. His small, deep-set eyes always looked out directly and merrily.
“What am I to do?” he said finally. “You know, I did all a father could for their upbringing, and they both turned out des imb&#233;ciles.  Ippolit is at least an untroublesome fool, but Anatole is a troublesome one. That’s the only difference,” he said, smiling more unnaturally and animatedly than usual, and with that showing especially clearly in the wrinkles that formed around his mouth something unexpectedly coarse and disagreeable.
Before he reached the sovereign, Rostov, an excellent horseman, twice put the spurs to his Bedouin and happily brought him to that furious-paced trot which Bedouin was prone to when excited. Lowering his foaming muzzle to his chest, his tail extended, and as if flying through the air without touching the ground, gracefully lifting his legs high as he shifted them, Bedouin, who also felt the sovereign’s gaze upon him, passed by superbly.
As rumor had it, the purpose of sending Savary was to propose peace and to propose a meeting between the emperor Alexander and Napoleon. A personal meeting, to the joy and pride of the whole army, was refused, and instead of the sovereign, Prince Dolgorukov, the victor at Wischau, was sent with Savary to negotiate with Napoleon, on the chance that these negotiations, contrary to expectation, had as their purpose a real desire for peace.
Do not break ranks on the pretext of removing the wounded! Let each of you be fully pervaded by the thought that we must defeat these mercenaries of England, inspired by such hatred of our nation. This victory will end our campaign, and we will be able to return to our winter quarters, where new French troops, now being raised in France, will find us; and then the peace which I will conclude will be worthy of my people, you, and myself.
“O-one! Two! Three!…” Denisov cried out angrily and stepped aside. The two men began walking over the imprinted tracks, getting closer and closer, and recognizing each other in the fog. The adversaries had the right to fire at any time while coming to the barrier. Dolokhov walked slowly, without raising his pistol, his light, shining blue eyes peering into his adversary’s face. On his mouth there was, as usual, the semblance of a smile.
Princess Marya moved towards him, saw his face, and something suddenly sank inside her. Her eyes ceased to see clearly. By her father’s face, not sad, not crushed, but angry and working itself unnaturally, she could see that there, there above her, hanging over her and crushing her, was a terrible misfortune, the worst misfortune in life, one she had not yet experienced, an irreparable, inconceivable misfortune—the death of a loved one.
His wound, despite its insignificance, still had not healed, though it was now six weeks since he was wounded. His face had the same pale swollenness of all the hospital faces. But it was not this that struck Rostov: what struck him was that Denisov did not seem glad to see him and smiled at him unnaturally. Denisov did not ask about the regiment, nor about the general course of affairs. When Rostov mentioned it, Denisov did not listen.
But the smile did not embellish Vera’s face, as usually happens; on the contrary, her face became unnatural and therefore unpleasant. The elder one, Vera, was good-looking, far from stupid, an excellent student, well-brought-up, had a pleasant voice, and what she said was correct and appropriate; but, strangely, everyone, both the guest and the countess, turned to look at her, as if wondering why she had said it, and they felt awkward.
“But one must be indulgent towards little weaknesses—who doesn’t have them, Andr&#233;! Don’t forget that she grew up and was formed in society. And then, her position now isn’t very rosy. One must enter into each person’s position. Tout comprendre, c’est tout pardonner. *171 Just think how it is for the poor dear, in her condition, after the life she’s used to, to part with her husband and remain alone in the country? It’s very hard.”
“Ah, my friend, how attached I’ve become to Julie lately,” she said to her son. “I can’t describe it to you! And who could possibly not love her? She’s such an unearthly being! Ah, Boris, Boris!” She would fall silent for a moment. “And how sorry I am for her maman, ” she would go on. “Today she showed me reports and letters from Penza (they have an enormous estate), and she does everything alone, poor thing: they deceive her so much!”
In the evening, between two orders—one about the speedy delivery of forged Russian banknotes prepared for distribution in Russia, and the other about the shooting of the Saxon caught with a letter containing information about the orders of the French army—Napoleon gave a third order about enrolling the Polish colonel who had needlessly thrown himself into the river in the L&#233;gion d’honneur,  of which Napoleon himself was the head.8
“You’re good in every way, Andr&#233;, but you have a sort of mental pride,” the princess said, following her own train of thought more than the course of the conversation, “and that is a great sin. Is it possible to judge one’s father? And even if it were possible, what other feeling than v&#233;n&#233;ration  can a man like mon p&#232;re  evoke? And I am so content and happy with him. I only wish everyone could be as happy as I am.”
Dolgorukov, one of the most fervent advocates of the offensive, had just come back from the council, weary, exhausted, but animated and proud of the victory won. Prince Andrei introduced the officer he was patronizing, but Prince Dolgorukov, giving him a polite and firm handshake, said nothing to Boris and, obviously unable to keep from speaking out the thoughts that occupied him most at that moment, addressed Prince Andrei in French.
“See where God granted us to meet again,” said the small man. “Tushin, Tushin—remember, I gave you a ride at Sch&#246;ngraben? I’ve had a bit cut off, see…” he said, smiling and showing the empty sleeve of the robe. “It’s Vassily Dmitrich Denisov you’re looking for? He’s my roommate,” he said, on learning who Rostov wanted. “This way, this way.” And Tushin led him to the other room, from which came the loud laughter of several voices.
In 1852, he joined the army as a noncommissioned officer and served in Wallachia. Two years later he was promoted to ensign and was transferred at his own request to the Crimea, where he fought in the Crimean War and was present at the siege of Sevastopol. His Sevastopol Sketches,  which were published in 1855, made him famous in Petersburg social and literary circles. They were a second and fuller attempt at a true depiction of war.
The magnificent reception room was filled. Everyone rose deferentially when the commander in chief, having spent about half an hour alone with the sick man, came out, responding slightly to the bows and trying to go quickly past the looks that doctors, clergymen, and relations directed at him. Prince Vassily, grown thin and pale during those days, accompanied the commander in chief and quietly repeated something to him several times.
“Really, it’s all the same to me, all quite the same!” said Prince Andrei, beginning to realize that his news about the battle at Krems was indeed of little importance in view of such events as the occupation of the capital of Austria. “How is it that Vienna’s been taken? What about the bridge? And the famous t&#234;te de pont, §196 and Prince Auersperg? There was a rumor among us that Prince Auersperg was defending Vienna,” he said.
Bonaparte’s adjutant galloped off at full speed with this threatening letter to Murat. Bonaparte himself, not trusting his generals, moved with all his guards to the field of battle, fearing to let the ready victim slip, while Bagration’s four-thousand-man division cheerfully lit campfires, dried out, warmed up, cooked kasha for the first time in three days, and not one man in the division knew or thought about what lay ahead of him.
And with brisk steps, as usual, he entered the drawing room, took everyone in with a quick glance, noticed the little princess’s change of dress, the ribbon on Bourienne, and Princess Marya’s ugly hairstyle, and the smiles of Bourienne and Anatole, and his daughter’s solitude amidst the general conversation. “Got herself up like a fool!” he thought, looking spitefully at his daughter. “No shame! And he doesn’t even want to know her!”
At the end of the session the grand master reprimanded Bezukhov with ill will and irony for his hotheadedness, saying that it was not love of virtue alone, but also a passion for struggle that had guided him in his argument. Pierre did not reply to him and asked curtly whether his suggestion would be accepted or not. He was told that it would not be, and Pierre, without waiting for the usual formalities, left the lodge and went home.
On the day of the count’s departure, Sonya and Natasha were invited to a big dinner at the Kuragins’, and Marya Dmitrievna brought them. At this dinner Natasha again met with Anatole, and Sonya noticed that Natasha discussed something with him, trying not to be heard, and all through dinner was still more agitated than before. When they returned home, Natasha was the first to begin that talk with Sonya which her friend was expecting.
And with a contemptuous sigh, he again changed position. At these words, Prince Ippolit, who had long been gazing at the viscount through his lorgnette, suddenly turned his whole body to the little princess and, asking her for a needle, began showing her the coat of arms of the Cond&#233;s,16 drawing with the needle on the table. He explained this coat of arms to her with a significant air, as if the princess had asked him about it.
“Life won’t leave one alone as it is. I’d be glad to do nothing, but then, on the one hand, the local nobility deemed me worthy of being elected their marshal;16 I barely got out of it. They couldn’t understand that I don’t have what it takes, don’t have the sort of good-natured and bustling banality needed for it. Then there’s this house, which had to be built so as to have a corner where I could be at peace. Now it’s the militia.”
Thanks to the delay, the old dog, his matted fur hanging from his haunches, headed off the wolf, and was now within five paces of him. The wolf, as if sensing the danger, gave Karai a sidelong glance, tucked his tail still further between his legs, and increased his pace. But here—Nikolai only saw that something happened with Karai—he was instantly on top of the wolf and rolled head over heels with him into a ditch in front of them.
The red blotches stood out still more on Princess Marya’s forehead, neck, and cheeks. She wanted to say something, but could not bring it out. Her brother had guessed right: the little princess had wept after dinner, had said she had a foreboding of a bad delivery, was afraid of it, and had complained about her life, her father-in-law, and her husband. After her tears, she had fallen asleep. Prince Andrei felt sorry for his sister.
A shout of command rang out, and again the regiment quivered, jingling, as it presented arms. In the dead silence, the weak voice of the commander in chief was heard. The regiment barked: “Long live Your Excellen-cellen-cellency!” And again everything grew still. At first Kutuzov stood in place while the regiment moved; then Kutuzov, with the white general beside him, on foot, followed by his suite, started walking along the ranks.
“I agree with you completely,” replied Nikolai, blushing all over, turning his plate and rearranging the glasses, and with such a determined and desperate air as though he was exposed right then to great danger. “I’m convinced that the Russians must either die or conquer,” he said, aware himself, as the others were, once the word had been spoken, that it was too rapturous and pompous for the present occasion and therefore awkward.
Having given more and more orders of various kinds, he was on his way to rest with his little countess, but remembered another necessary thing, came back himself, brought the chef and the manager back, and again began giving orders. A light male footstep was heard at the door, a jingle of spurs, and the young count came in, handsome, ruddy, with a black little mustache, obviously rested and pampered by his peaceful life in Moscow.
Just as Prince Andrei met Nesvitsky and Zherkov, the Austrian general Strauch, attached to Kutuzov’s staff to oversee the supplying of the Russian army, came from the other end of the corridor, along with the member of the Hofkriegsrath who had arrived the day before. The corridor was wide enough for the generals to pass the three officers unhindered, but Zherkov, pushing Nesvitsky aside with his hand, said in a breathless voice:
In the evening, when they all began to disperse after supper, Anatole kissed Princess Marya’s hand. She did not know herself how she had boldness enough, but she glanced straight at the beautiful face as it approached her nearsighted eyes. After the princess, he went to kiss Mlle Bourienne’s hand (this was improper, but he did everything so confidently and simply), and Mlle Bourienne blushed and glanced fearfully at the princess.
Rostov, not taking his eyes away, despite the trampling of the French gendarmes’ horses, attempting to move the crowd back, followed every movement of the emperor Alexander and Bonaparte. He was struck, as if it was unexpected, by the fact that Alexander behaved as an equal with Bonaparte, and that Bonaparte, quite freely, as if such closeness to the sovereign was natural and habitual to him, treated the Russian tsar as an equal.
Rostov, hunching his shoulders as water ran down his neck, was smoking his pipe and listening inattentively, glancing now and then at the young officer Ilyin, who huddled up to him. This officer, a sixteen-year-old boy who had recently joined the regiment, was now in relation to Nikolai what Nikolai had been in relation to Denisov seven years ago. Ilyin tried to imitate Rostov in everything, and was in love with him like a woman.
Half an hour later the lined-up squadron was standing on the road. The command “Mount up!” rang out, the soldiers crossed themselves and began to mount up. Rostov, riding ahead, gave the command, “March!” and, stretching out four abreast, the hussars, with the sounds of hoofs splashing on the wet road, the clank of sabers, and quiet talk, started down the big, birch-lined road, in the wake of the preceding infantry and artillery.
“But what is there to say about me?” asked Pierre, spreading his mouth into a carefree, merry smile. “What am I? Je suis un b&#226;tard! ” And he suddenly flushed crimson. One could see that it had cost him great effort to say that. “Sans nom, sans fortune †80 …And what, really…” But he did not say what really.  “I’m free so far, and I feel fine. Only I have no idea where to make my start. I seriously wanted to ask your advice.”
“Listen,” he said, “don’t worry about your wife: whatever can be done, will be done. Now listen: give this letter to Mikhail Ilarionovich. I write that he should use you in good posts and not keep you long as an adjutant: nasty duty! Tell him I remember him and love him. And write and tell me how he receives you. If he’s all right, serve him. Nikolai Andreevich Bolkonsky’s son won’t serve anyone on charity. Well, now come here.”
“Ah, enough, please, as if you could come at the wrong time,” said Boris. He led him into the room, where the supper table had been laid, introduced him to his guests, giving his name and explaining that he was not a civilian, but a hussar officer and his old friend. “Count Zhilinsky, le comte N. N., le capitaine S. S., ” he named his guests. Rostov looked frowningly at the Frenchmen, made his bows reluctantly, and said nothing.
Instead of an enemy, Nikolai found in Ilagin a respectable, courteous gentleman, especially desirous of making the young count’s acquaintance. Riding up to Rostov, Ilagin raised his beaver cap and said that he very much regretted what had happened, said that he would order the hunter punished for allowing himself to hunt from under another man’s dogs, asked to make the count’s acquaintance, and offered him his own hunting spots.
He said that our wars with Bonaparte would be unsuccessful so long as we sought alliance with the Germans and meddled in the affairs of Europe, which we had been drawn into by the peace of Tilsit. We had no need to fight either for or against Austria. Our politics all lie in the East, and in relation to Bonaparte there is one thing—armed borders and firm politics—and he will never dare cross Russian borders as in the year seven.
The old man was in high spirits following his before-dinner nap. (He used to say that an after-dinner nap was silver, but a before-dinner nap was gold.) He joyfully cast sidelong glances at his son from under his thick, beetling brows. Prince Andrei went up and kissed his father on the place indicated to him. He did not respond to his father’s favorite subject—poking fun at the present-day military, and especially at Bonaparte.
“So it’s all over!” he thought. “And how did it all happen? So quickly! Now I know that, not for her alone, not for me alone, but for all of them, this  inevitably had to come about. They all expect this  so much, they’re so certain it will be, that I simply cannot disappoint them. But how will it be? I don’t know; but it will be, it will be without fail!” thought Pierre, glancing at those shoulders gleaming just near his eyes.
An hour later Tikhon came to summon Princess Marya. He summoned her to the prince and added that Prince Vassily Sergeich was also there. When Tikhon came, the princess was sitting on the sofa in her room, holding the weeping Mlle Bourienne in her arms. Princess Marya was gently stroking her head. Her beautiful eyes, with all their former calm and luminosity, looked at the pretty face of Mlle Bourienne with tender love and pity.
“Yes, we know, but what I know as evil for myself, I cannot do to another person,” Prince Andrei was speaking more and more animatedly, clearly wishing to voice his new view of things to Pierre. He spoke in French. “Je ne connais dans la vie que deux maux bien r&#233;els: c’est le remords et la maladie. Il n’est de bien que l’absence de ces maux. *315 To live for myself, only avoiding these two evils—that is all my wisdom now.”
“Insolent fellows!” said the prince. “Do you know M&#233;tivier? I threw him out today. He was here, he was let in to see me, though I had asked them not to let anybody in,” said the prince, looking angrily at his daughter. And he recounted the whole conversation with the French doctor and the reasons why he became convinced that M&#233;tivier was a spy. Though those reasons were quite insufficient and unclear, no one objected.
The man in tight breeches sang alone, then she sang. Then they both fell silent, music began to play, and the man began to touch the hand of the girl in the white dress with his fingers, evidently waiting for the beat again so as to begin his part with her. They sang together, and everybody in the theater clapped and shouted, and the man and woman on stage, who represented lovers, began to bow, smiling and spreading their arms.
The old man seemed more animated than usual. Princess Marya was the same as ever, but Pierre saw in her, beyond her compassion for her brother, her joy that her brother’s marriage had been thwarted. Looking at them, Pierre realized what contempt and spite they all felt for the Rostovs, and realized that it was impossible in their presence even to mention the name of her who could exchange Prince Andrei for whomever it might be.
Some of the nearest relations were still there. They were sitting in the big drawing room. Prince Vassily walked lazily over to Pierre. Pierre stood up and said it was already late. Prince Vassily gave him a sternly questioning look, as if what he had said was so strange that he could not even hear it well. But then the expression of sternness changed, and Prince Vassily pulled Pierre’s arm down, seated him, and smiled gently.
Of the three precepts of Masonry, Pierre realized that he was not fulfilling the one which required every Mason to be an example of the moral life, and of the seven virtues he was totally lacking in two: good character and the love of death. He comforted himself by thinking that he was fulfilling another duty instead—the setting to rights of the human race—and had other virtues—love of his neighbor and, especially, generosity.
“Le duc d’Oldenbourg supporte son malheur avec une force de charact&#232;re et une r&#233;signation admirables,” *361 said Boris, respectfully entering into the conversation. He said it because, on his way from Petersburg, he had had the honor of being introduced to the duke. Prince Nikolai Andreich looked at the young man as if he wanted to tell him something about that, but changed his mind, considering him too young for it.
Rostov, still looking towards the fires and cries, rode with the sergeant to meet several horsemen who were riding along the line. One was on a white horse. Prince Bagration and Prince Dolgorukov, with their adjutants, had ridden out to look at the strange phenomenon of the fires and cries in the enemy army. Rostov, riding up to Bagration, reported to him and joined the adjutants, trying to hear what the generals were saying.
“And what’s wrong, good lady, why shouldn’t I tell him? I like him. He’s kind. God’s chosen, he gave me ten rubles, my benefactor, I remember. When I was in Kiev, Kiriusha, a holy fool21—truly a man of God, he goes barefoot winter and summer—‘Why do you go about where you don’t belong,’ he says, ‘go to Kolyazin, there’s a miracle-working icon revealed, the holy Mother of God.’ At that word I took leave of the monks and went…”
“Despite my full respect for old Kutuzov,” he went on, “what good ones we’d all be, waiting for something and giving him a chance to escape or trick us, whereas now he’s certainly in our hands. No, we mustn’t forget Suvorov and his rules: don’t put yourself in a position to be attacked, but attack yourself. Believe me, in war the energy of young men often points to a surer way than all the experience of the old cunctators.”5
“I shall never dare to say that I know the truth,” said the Mason, amazing Pierre more and more with his definite and firm speech. “No one can attain to the truth by himself; only stone by stone, with the participation of all, over millions of generations, from our forefather Adam down to our time, is the temple being built which is to become a worthy dwelling place for the great God,” said the Mason, and he closed his eyes.
The campaign began, the regiment was moved to Poland, the pay was doubled, new officers arrived, new men and horses, and above all that excitedly cheerful mood spread around which accompanies the beginning of war; and Rostov, conscious of his advantageous position in the regiment, gave himself up wholly to the pleasures and interests of military service, though he knew that sooner or later he would have to leave them behind.
The Pavlogradsky hussar regiment was stationed two miles from Braunau. The squadron in which Nikolai Rostov served as a junker had settled in the German village of Salzeneck. The squadron commander, Captain Denisov, known to the whole cavalry division as Vaska Denisov, was assigned the best quarters in the village. Junker Rostov had been living with the squadron commander ever since he caught up with his regiment in Poland.
“Forgive me for troubling you…” Pierre realized that Prince Andrei wanted to talk about Natasha, and his broad face expressed regret and compassion. This expression of Pierre’s face angered Prince Andrei; he went on resolutely, in a ringing and unpleasant voice: “I have received a refusal from Countess Rostov, and rumors have reached me about her hand being sought by your brother-in-law, or something like that. Is it true?”
There exists in men a certain after-dinner state of mind which, more strongly than any reasonable causes, makes a man feel content with himself and consider everyone his friend. Napoleon was in that state of mind. It seemed to him that he was surrounded by people who adored him. He was convinced that after his dinner Balashov, too, was his friend and adorer. Napoleon addressed him with a pleasant and slightly mocking smile.
“Good sir, what have you said, God forgive you!” She crossed herself. “Lord, forgive him. Good lady, what is this?…” she turned to Princess Marya. She got up and, all but in tears, began packing her bag. She was clearly frightened, and sorry for the one who had said it, and ashamed that she had received benefactions in a house where such things could be said, and sorry that she now had to be deprived of those benefactions.
Anatole sincerely liked Dolokhov for his intelligence and daring; Dolokhov, who needed the name, noble birth, and connections of Anatole Kuragin to lure rich young men into his gambling company, used and toyed with Kuragin without letting him feel it. Apart from the calculation which made Anatole necessary for him, the very process of manipulating another person’s will was a pleasure, a habit, and a necessity for Dolokhov.
Prince Andrei remembered nothing more: he lost consciousness from the terrible pain of being put on the stretcher, the jolting while he was being carried, and the probing of his wound at the first-aid station. He came to only at the end of the day, when he, along with other Russian wounded and captured officers, was taken to the hospital. During this transfer, he felt somewhat fresher and could look around and even speak.
“Dismiss an old man to his country estates, who is left disgraced as it is that he cannot fulfill the great and glorious destiny for which he was chosen. I shall await your most merciful permission here in the hospital, to avoid playing the role of a scrivener  rather than a commander  of troops. My removal from the army will cause no greater stir than if a blind man was leaving it. There are thousands like me in Russia.”
“Ah, Your Excellency,” Zherkov mixed in, not taking his eyes from the hussars, but still with his na&#239;ve manner, which made it impossible to tell whether he was speaking seriously or not. “Ah, Your Excellency! What a way to reason! Send two men, and who’s going to give us a Vladimir with a bow?5 This way they may get beaten, but the squadron will be distinguished, and he’ll get a bow. Our Bogdanych knows the system.”
Having come home and told their mother how they spent the time at the Melyukovs’, the girls went to their room. They undressed, but without wiping off their cork mustaches, and sat for a long time talking about their happiness. They talked about how they would live when they were married, how their husbands would be friends, and how they would be happy. Mirrors prepared by Dunyasha since evening stood on Natasha’s table.
The night he received this information, Kutuzov sent Bagration’s four-thousand-man vanguard to the right over the hills from the Krems–Znaim to the Vienna–Znaim road. Bagration was to make this march without resting, to stop with his face to Vienna and his back to Znaim, and, if he managed to forestall the French, to detain them there as long as he could. Kutuzov himself started out for Znaim with all the heavy baggage.
The men remained at the table over the port, English style. In the middle of the conversation that started up about Napoleon’s Spanish campaign,20 of which they all held the same approving opinion, Prince Andrei began to contradict them. Speransky smiled and, obviously trying to divert the conversation from the direction it had taken, told an anecdote that had no relation to it. They all fell silent for several moments.
In the winter Prince Andrei came to Bald Hills, and was cheerful, meek, and affectionate, as Princess Marya had not seen him for a long time. She sensed that something had happened to him, but he said nothing to Princess Marya about his love. Before his departure, Prince Andrei had a long talk about something with his father, and Princess Marya noticed that before his departure they were both displeased with each other.
“On the contrary,” he said in a peevish and angry tone, quite contradictory to the flattering meaning of the words he spoke, “on the contrary, Your Excellency’s participation in the common cause is highly appreciated by his majesty; but we think that the present delay is depriving the valiant Russian army and its commanders of the laurels they are accustomed to reap in battle,” he finished an obviously prepared phrase.
In Petersburg, just as in Moscow, an atmosphere of affectionate, loving people surrounded Pierre. He could not refuse the post or, rather, the rank (because he did nothing) that Prince Vassily had provided him with, and the acquaintances, invitations, social occupations were so many that Pierre experienced, even more than in Moscow, a feeling of fogginess, hurriedness, and some ever approaching but never attained good.
“No, it’s impossible,” she said resolutely, clasping her hands. “Non, Marie, d&#233;cid&#233;ment, &#231;a ne vous va pas. Je vous aime mieux dans votre petite robe grise de tout les jours. Non, de gr&#226;ce, faites cela pour moi. *241 Katya,” she said to the maid, “bring the princess her little gray dress, and watch, Mlle Bourienne, how I’m going to arrange it,” she said, with a smiling foretaste of artistic delight.
At the Rostovs’ it was the name day of the Natalyas, mother and younger daughter.24 Since morning, coach and sixes had constantly been driving up and leaving, bringing people with congratulations to the big house of the countess Rostov on Povarskaya Street, which was known to all Moscow. The countess with her beautiful older daughter and the guests, who constantly replaced each other, were sitting in the drawing room.
“I think, however, that there are also grounds for these condemnations,” said Prince Andrei, trying to fight against Speransky’s influence, which he was beginning to feel. He disliked agreeing with him in everything: he wanted to contradict. Prince Andrei, who usually spoke easily and well, had difficulty expressing himself now in talking with Speransky. He was too taken up with observing the person of the famous man.
“Yes, ma ch&#232;re, ” said the old count, addressing the guest and pointing to his Nikolai. “Here his friend Boris has just been made an officer, and out of friendship he doesn’t want to lag behind; he’s leaving both the university and his old father: he’s going into the army, ma ch&#232;re.  And a post had already been prepared for him in the archives and all.27 Isn’t that friendship?” the count said questioningly.
A lackey came to summon Boris to the princess. The princess was leaving. Pierre promised to come for dinner, in order to become closer with Boris, pressed his hand hard, looked him affectionately in the eye through his spectacles…After his departure, Pierre spent a long time pacing the room, no longer piercing the invisible enemy with his sword, but smiling at the memory of this nice, intelligent, and firm young man.
“Congratulations to the dear name-day lady and her children,” she said in her loud, dense voice, which overwhelmed all other noises. “And you, you old sinner,” she turned to the count, who was kissing her hand, “I bet you’re bored in Moscow? No chasing about with dogs here? Nothing to be done, old boy, look how these birdies are growing up.” She pointed to the girls. “Like it or not, you’ll have to hunt for suitors.”
The princess sank strengthlessly into the armchair next to her father and wept. She now saw her brother at the moment when he had taken leave of her and Liza, with his tender and at the same time arrogant air, saw him at the moment when, tenderly and mockingly, he had put on the little icon. “Did he believe? Did he repent of his unbelief? Was he now there? There, in the place of eternal rest and bliss?” she wondered.
“Right you are!…I just knew,” the uncle began (he was a distant relation, a none-too-wealthy neighbor of the Rostovs), “I just knew you wouldn’t stay home, and it’s a good thing you didn’t. Right you are!” (This was the uncle’s favorite saying.) “Take the reserve at once, because my Girchik told me the Ilagins are at Korniki with their hunt. They’ll snatch the litter—right you are!—straight out from under your nose.”
Balashov, feeling it necessary to object, said that on the Russian side things did not look so gloomy. Napoleon said nothing, went on looking at him mockingly, and obviously was not listening to him. Balashov said that in Russia all sorts of good things were expected from the war. Napoleon nodded condescendingly, as if to say: “I know it’s your duty to say so, but you don’t believe it yourself, I have persuaded you.”
Without any order, all the cannon were turned in the direction of the fire. As if egging it on, the soldiers kept crying at each shot: “Fine work! That’s the way! Just look…Grand!” The fire, borne by the wind, spread quickly. The French columns that had moved out of the village went back, but, as if in punishment for this failure, the enemy set up ten guns to the right of the village and began firing them at Tushin.
“Oh, very much! My brother knows him: he dined with him, the present emperor, more than once in Paris, and he told me that he never saw a more subtle and clever diplomat—you know, a combination of French adroitness and Italian playacting. Do you know the anecdotes about him and Count Mark&#243;v? Count Mark&#243;v was the only one who knew how to handle him. Do you know the story of the handkerchief? It’s charming!”
After M&#233;tivier’s departure, the old prince called his daughter to him, and all the force of his wrath fell upon her. It was her fault that a spy had been let in to his rooms. Yet he had told her, he had told her to make a list and not let in anyone not on the list. Why had this scoundrel been let in? She was the cause of it all. “With her he could not have a moment’s peace, he could not die in peace,” he said.
“How is he now? Is he embarrassed? Angry? Should I set things right?” she asked herself. She could not help turning to look. She looked straight into his eyes, and his nearness, and his confidence, and the good-natured tenderness of his smile won her over. She also smiled at him, just as he did, looking straight into his eyes. And again she felt with horror that between him and her there was no barrier of any sort.
The faces of the soldiers and officers cheered up at this sound; everybody stood up and began watching the movements of our troops below, visible as on the palm of the hand, and further away the movements of the advancing enemy. Just then the sun came all the way out from behind the clouds, and the beautiful sound of the solitary shot and the shining of the bright sun merged into one cheerful and merry impression.
Although Anatole, in women’s company, usually placed himself in the position of a man who is sick of having women running after him, he took a vain pleasure in seeing his effect on these three women. Besides, he was beginning to experience for the pretty and provocative Bourienne that passionate, animal feeling which came over him with extraordinary quickness and urged him towards the most coarse and bold actions.
The steward did not say it was completely impossible; to achieve that goal, he suggested selling the woodlands in Kostroma province, selling the bottomlands and the Crimean estate. But all these operations, as the steward spoke of them, became bound up with such a complexity of processes of lifting prohibitions, requesting permissions, and so on, that Pierre was at a loss and only said to him: “Yes, yes, do that.”
“What shtil,  how nicely he describes things!” she said, reading the descriptive part of the letter. “And what soul! Nothing about himself…nothing! About some Denisov, but he himself is probably braver than all of them. He writes nothing about his sufferings. And what heart! It’s so like him! And how he remembered everyone! He didn’t forget anybody. I always, always said, when he was only so high, I always said…”
“You see, my most gentle sir, I have read your memorandum,” Arakcheev interrupted, speaking only the first words benignly, again without looking him in the face and lapsing more and more into a grumblingly contemptuous tone. “Proposing new military regulations? There are many regulations, and no one to carry out the old ones. Everybody writes regulations these days; it’s easier to write them than to follow them.”
Pelageya Danilovna, having ordered a space cleared for the guests and snacks served to the masters and servants, not removing her spectacles, with a suppressed smile, walked among the mummers, looking closely at their faces and not recognizing anybody. She not only did not recognize the Rostovs or Dimmler, but she could not recognize her own daughters, or her husband’s robes and uniforms, which they were wearing.
Seeing Cossacks (les Cosaques)  on the other side and the spreading steppe (les Steppes),  in the middle of which lay Moscou la ville sainte, *393 capital of that state, similar to the Scythian state to which Alexander the Great had marched—Napoleon, unexpectedly for everyone, and contrary to both strategic and diplomatic considerations, ordered an advance, and the next day his troops started crossing the Niemen.
“Pecause, my tear sir,” he said, pronouncing the b  as a p  and the d  as a t,  “pecause the emperor knows that. He said in the manifesto that he cannot look mit intifference at the tangers that threaten Russia, and that the security of the empire, its tignity, and the sacretness of its alliances …” he said, for some reason giving special emphasis to the word alliances,  as if this was the essence of the matter.
Sitting in his former schoolroom, on the sofa with padded armrests, and looking into Natasha’s desperately lively eyes, Rostov again entered that world of his family and childhood, which had no meaning for anyone but him, but which had provided him with one of the best enjoyments in life; and the burning of the arm with a ruler to show love did not seem nonsense to him; he understood and was not surprised at it.
“Le Roi de Prusse!”  and, having said it, he began to laugh. Everyone turned to him. “Le Roi de Prusse?”  Ippolit asked, laughed again, and again calmly and seriously sat back in the depths of his armchair. Anna Pavlovna waited a little, but as it seemed that Ippolit decidedly had no intention of saying more, she began to tell about how the godless Bonaparte purloined the sword of Frederick the Great in Potsdam.
“Drain the blood from their veins, put in water, then there’ll be no more war. Nonsense, old women’s nonsense,” he said, but even so he patted Pierre affectionately on the shoulder and went over to the desk, where Prince Andrei, evidently unwilling to enter the conversation, was looking through the papers that the old prince had brought from town. The old prince went over to him and began talking about business.
In the course of a boring day, during which Prince Andrei was entertained by the older hosts and the most respected guests, who filled the old count’s house on the occasion of an approaching name-day party, Bolkonsky glanced several times at Natasha, who was laughing at something and having fun among the other, young half of the company, still asking himself: “What is she thinking about? What is she so glad of?”
“Why shouldn’t I marry her?” he said to his daughter. “She’d make a nice princess!” And lately, to her perplexity and astonishment, Princess Marya began to notice that her father had indeed become more and more intimate with the Frenchwoman. Princess Marya wrote to Prince Andrei about how their father had taken his letter; but she comforted her brother, giving him hope of reconciling their father to the thought.
Napoleon, though now, in 1812, it seemed to him more than ever that it depended on him verser  or not verser le sang de ses peuples *392 (as Alexander wrote in his last letter to him), had never been more subject than now to those inevitable laws which forced him (acting by his own free will, as it seemed to him, with respect to himself) to do for the common cause, for history, that which had to be accomplished.
“I thank you all, gentlemen, all the branches acted heroically: infantry, cavalry, and artillery. How is it that two guns in the center were abandoned?” he asked, seeking someone with his eyes. (Prince Bagration did not ask about the guns of the left flank; he already knew that all the cannon there had been abandoned at the very beginning.) “I asked you to go, I believe,” he turned to the staff officer on duty.
He shaved, scented himself with a thoroughness and foppishness that had become habitual to him, and with his innately good-humored and triumphant expression, carrying his handsome head high, went into his father’s room. Two valets were bustling around Prince Vassily, dressing him; he himself looked around animatedly and nodded cheerfully to his entering son, as if to say: “Right, that’s how I need you to look!”
Having gone past the guards and an empty space, Rostov, to avoid getting into the front line again, as he had during the attack of the horse guards, followed the line of the reserves, making a wide circle around the place where the hottest shooting and cannon fire were heard. Suddenly, ahead of him and behind our troops, in a place where he could never have supposed the enemy to be, he heard nearby musket fire.
Cursing his boldness, his heart sinking at the thought that he could meet the sovereign at any moment, be disgraced before him and put under arrest, fully understanding all the inappropriateness of his behavior and regretting it, Rostov, with lowered eyes, was making his way out of the house, surrounded by the crowd of the brilliant suite, when someone’s familiar voice called him and someone’s hand stopped him.
Pierre was beginning to feel dissatisfied with his activity. Masonry, at least the Masonry he knew here, sometimes seemed to him to be based on appearance alone. He never thought of doubting Masonry itself, but he suspected that Russian Masonry had taken the wrong path and deviated from its source. And therefore, at the end of the year, Pierre went abroad to be initiated into the highest mysteries of the order.
They fell silent. Prince Andrei looked closely into those mirror-like eyes which did not let anything in, and felt how ridiculous it was that he could have expected anything from Speransky and from all his activity connected with him, and that he could have ascribed importance to what Speransky was doing. That precise, mirthless laughter went on ringing in Prince Andrei’s ears long after he had left Speransky.
No one in the house ordered so many people around or gave them so much work as Natasha. She could not look at people indifferently, without sending them somewhere. It seemed as if she were testing whether any of them would get angry or upset with her, but people liked carrying out Natasha’s orders as they did no one else’s. “What shall I do? Where shall I go?” thought Natasha, walking slowly down the corridor.
Marya Dmitrievna came home for dinner, silent, grave, obviously having suffered a defeat at the old prince’s. She was still too agitated after the confrontation that had occurred to be able to tell about it calmly. To the count’s question, she replied that all was well and that she would tell him about it tomorrow. Learning of Countess Bezukhov’s visit and the invitation for the evening, Marya Dmitrievna said:
When Prince Meshchersky left, Prince Andrei took Pierre by the arm and invited him to the room he had been given. There was a rumpled bed in the room and open suitcases and trunks. Prince Andrei went over to one of them and took out a box. From the box he took a bundle of papers. He did it all silently and very quickly. He straightened up and cleared his throat. His face was frowning, his lips were compressed.
Pierre took off his spectacles, and his eyes, on top of the general strangeness of people’s eyes when they take off their spectacles, had a frightened and questioning look. He was about to bend down to her hand and kiss it; but she, with a quick and crude movement of her head, intercepted his lips and brought them together with her own. Her face struck Pierre by its altered, unpleasantly perplexed expression.
As always happens with lonely women who have long lived without the society of men, on Anatole’s appearance all three women in Prince Nikolai Andreevich’s house felt equally that their life had not been life until that moment. The power of thought, feeling, observation instantly increased tenfold in them, as if their life, going on in darkness till then, was suddenly lit up by a new light filled with meaning.
“No, what is there to talk about!” said Pierre. “It makes no difference…So, are we ready?” he added. “Only tell me, where am I to go and where am I to shoot?” he said with an unnaturally meek smile. He took the pistol in his hands and began asking how to pull the trigger, because until then he had never handled a pistol, something he did not want to admit. “Ah, yes, like that, I know, I just forgot,” he said.
“Your way of thinking is known to me,” said the Mason, “and this way of thinking of yours, which you are talking about and which seems to you the result of your own mental work, is the way of thinking of the majority of people, the monotonous fruit of pride, laziness, and ignorance. Forgive me, my dear sir, but if I did not know it, I would not be talking with you. Your way of thinking is a lamentable error.”
“He’s better than all of you,” Natasha cried, getting up. “If you hadn’t interfered…Oh, my God, what is it, what is it! Why, Sonya! Go away!…” And she sobbed with that despair with which people weep only over a grief of which they feel themselves the cause. Marya Dmitrievna tried to speak again, but Natasha shouted: “Go away, go away, you all hate me and despise me!” and she threw herself onto the sofa again.
In the year twelve, when news of the war with Napoleon reached Bucharest (where Kutuzov had been staying for two months, spending the days and nights with his Wallachian woman), Prince Andrei asked Kutuzov to transfer him to the Western Army. Kutuzov, who by then was sick of Bolkonsky’s activity, which served as a reproach to his idleness, quite willingly let him go and gave him an errand to Barclay de Tolly.
“The emperor Alexander,” she said, with the sadness that always accompanied her talk about the imperial family, “declared that he would leave it to the French themselves to choose their form of government. And I think there’s no doubt that the whole nation, freed of the usurper, will throw itself into the arms of the lawful king,” Anna Pavlovna said, trying to be amiable to the &#233;migr&#233; and royalist.
Again there appeared on all the cheerful faces of the men of the squadron that serious trait that had been there when they were under fire. Rostov, never taking his eyes away, kept looking at his enemy, the regimental commander, wishing to find on his face a confirmation of his surmises; but the colonel never once glanced at Rostov, but, as always at the front, looked stern and solemn. The command was heard.
“Well, so she loves me and you.” Natasha suddenly blushed. “Well, you remember, before you left…So she says you should forget it all…She said: ‘I’ll always love him, but let him be free.’ That’s excellent, excellent and noble, isn’t it? Right, right? very noble? right?” Natasha asked so earnestly and excitedly that it was clear that what she was saying now, she had said before through tears. Rostov pondered.
Neither her father and mother, nor Sonya, nor Prince Andrei himself could have foreseen how parting with her fianc&#233; would affect Natasha. Flushed and agitated, her eyes dry, she wandered about the house that day, occupying herself with the most insignificant things, as if not understanding what awaited her. She did not cry when, at the moment of taking leave of her, he kissed her hand for the last time.
She did it exactly right, and so precisely, so perfectly precisely, that Anisya Fyodorovna, who at once handed Natasha the kerchief she needed for it, wept through her laughter, looking at this slender, graceful countess, brought up in silk and velvet, so foreign to her, who was able to understand everything that was in Anisya and in Anisya’s father, and in her aunt, and in her mother, and in every Russian.
“Since I do not intend to frequent your house anymore, for reasons known to you, and am leaving for the army, tonight I am giving a farewell party for my friends—come to the English Hotel.” That evening, after nine o’clock, Rostov went to the English Hotel from the theater, where he had been with his family and Denisov. He was brought at once to the best rooms of the hotel, taken for the night by Dolokhov.
Half an hour later the rhetor came back to transmit to the seeker the seven virtues, corresponding to the seven steps of Solomon’s temple, which every Mason was supposed to cultivate in himself. These virtues were: (1) discretion,  keeping the secrets of the order; (2) obedience  to the higher ranks of the order; (3) good morals;  (4) love of mankind;  (5) courage;  (6) generosity;  and (7) love of death.
Natasha followed the direction of her father’s gaze and saw Julie, who, with pearls on her fat, red neck (which Natasha knew was daubed with powder), was sitting with a happy look next to her mother. Behind them Boris’s head could be seen, handsome, smoothly combed, smiling, its ear inclined to Julie’s mouth. He looked at the Rostovs from under his eyebrows and, smiling, said something to his fianc&#233;e.
While Prince Andrei went to report about the purple general, that general, who obviously did not share Boris’s notions about the advantages of the unwritten subordination, so fixed his eyes on the insolent ensign who had prevented him from finishing his talk with the adjutant that Boris felt awkward. He turned away and waited impatiently for Prince Andrei to come back from the commander in chief’s office.
“Yerzinka! Dearie!” wailed Ilagin in a voice not his own. Yerza did not heed his prayer. At the very moment she was expected to seize the hare, he swerved and flew out to the boundary between the green fields and the stubble. Again Yerza and Milka, like a team of horses, straightened up and sped after the hare; it was easier for him to run along the boundary, and dogs could not close in on him so quickly.
“But how do you find all this latest comedy du sacre de Milan, ”14 asked Anna Pavlovna. “Et la nouvelle com&#233;die des peuples de G&#234;nes et de Lucques, qui viennent pr&#233;senter leurs voeux &#224; M. Buonaparte. M. Buonaparte assis sur un tr&#244;ne, et exau&#231;ant les voeux des nations! Adorable! Non, mais c’est &#224; en devenir folle! On dirait, que le monde entier a perdu la t&#234;te.” †49
“Liberty and equality,” the viscount said scornfully, as if finally deciding to prove seriously to this young man all the stupidity of his talk, “these are resounding words that have long been compromised. Who doesn’t love liberty and equality? Our Savior already preached liberty and equality. Did people become happier after the revolution? On the contrary. We wanted liberty, but Bonaparte destroyed it.”
The Englishman nodded his head, in no way making clear whether he did or did not accept this new bet. Anatole did not let go of the Englishman, and though he had nodded to show he had understood everything, Anatole translated Dolokhov’s words into English for him. A young, lean boy, a life-hussar, who had gambled away everything that evening, climbed up on the window, stuck his head out, and looked down.
“Mama, can we talk? Say yes,” said Natasha. “Well, so one kiss here, another, and that’s it.” And she embraced her mother’s neck and kissed her under the chin. There was an outward crudeness in Natasha’s treatment of her mother, but she was so sensitive and adroit that, no matter how she embraced her mother, she was always able to do it so that it was neither painful, nor unpleasant, nor awkward for her.
Of late Pierre had rarely seen his wife alone. Both in Petersburg and in Moscow, their house was constantly full of guests. The night after the duel, he did not go to his bedroom, but remained, as he often did, in his father’s enormous study, the same in which old Count Bezukhov had died. Tormenting as the inner work of the previous sleepless night had been, still more tormenting work was beginning now.
A week later Prince Andrei was a member of the commission on military regulations and, something he had never expected, head of a section of the legislative commission. At Speransky’s request, he took the first part of the civil code, then in the process of being developed, and with the help of the Code Napol&#233;on  and the Justiniani, 9 worked on putting together the section headed “Personal Rights.”
“So it’s right?” said Nikolai, once more searching into the expression of his sister’s face to find out if it was true, and, his boots creaking, he jumped off the fender and ran to his sleigh. The same happy, smiling Circassian with a little mustache and shining eyes, looking from under a sable hood, sat there, and this Circassian was Sonya, and this Sonya was certainly his future happy and loving wife.
“And where’s the fur coat?” said Dolokhov. “Hey, Ignashka! Go to Matryona Matveevna, ask for her sable coat. I’ve heard how people elope,” Dolokhov said, winking. “She’ll come running out more dead than alive, in whatever she had on at home; if there’s any dawdling—there’ll be tears, and papa and mama, and she’ll get cold and go back. You must wrap her in a fur coat at once and carry her to the sleigh.”
When the whole samovar had been drunk, Rostov took the cards and suggested a game of “kings” with Marya Genrikhovna. They drew lots for who would be Marya Genrikhovna’s partner. The rules of the game were, at Rostov’s suggestion, that whoever was the king had the right to kiss Marya Genrikhovna’s hand, and that whoever was left the knave would go and prepare a new samovar for the doctor when he woke up.
Napoleon noticed Balashov’s confusion as he uttered these last words; his face twitched, his left calf began to tremble rhythmically. Without leaving his place, he began to speak in a higher and more hurried voice than before. During the speech that followed, Balashov, lowering his eyes more than once, involuntarily observed the trembling of Napoleon’s left calf, which increased as he raised his voice.
“Oui, mon cher, c’est une grande perte pour nous tous. Je ne parle pas de vous. Mais Dieu vous soutiendra, vous &#234;tes jeune et vous voil&#224; &#224; la t&#234;te d’une immense fortune, je l’esp&#232;re. Le testament n’a pas &#233;t&#233; encore ouvert. Je vous connais assez pour savoir que cela ne vous tournera pas la t&#234;te, mais cela vous impose des devoirs, et il faut &#234;tre homme.” ‡144
“What can that be?” thought Rostov. “The enemy in the rear of our troops? It can’t be,” thought Rostov, and the terror of fear for himself and for the outcome of the whole battle suddenly came over him. “Whatever it may be, however,” he thought, “there’s no point now in going around. I must look for the commander in chief here, and if all is lost, then it’s my business to perish along with everybody.”
“Ah, my God, Count, there are moments when I’d marry anybody!” Princess Marya said suddenly, to her own surprise, with tears in her voice. “Ah, how painful it is to love a person who is close to you and feel…that you can do nothing for him,” she went on in a trembling voice, “except grieve him, and when you know that you cannot change that. There’s only one thing left—to go away, but where will I go?”
After four days of solitude, boredom, consciousness of his dependence and insignificance, felt especially sharply after the milieu of power in which he had been so recently, after several marches with the marshal’s baggage and the French troops, who occupied the entire area, Balashov was brought to Vilno, now occupied by the French, through the same gate from which he had ridden out four days earlier.
Prince Vassily frowned, his mouth twisted to one side, his cheeks twitched with an unpleasant, coarse expression peculiar to him; he roused himself, got up, threw his head back, and with a resolute stride walked past the ladies into the small drawing room. He strode quickly, joyfully up to Pierre. The prince’s expression was so extraordinarily joyful that Pierre stood up, frightened, when he saw him.
Prince Andrei started to object and demonstrate his own plan, which might have been just as good as Weyrother’s, but had the shortcoming that Weyrother’s had already been approved. As soon as Prince Andrei began to demonstrate the disadvantages of the latter and the advantages of his own, Prince Dolgorukov stopped listening to him, and gazed absentmindedly not at the map, but at Prince Andrei’s face.
“I have come to you with a suggestion and a message, Count,” he said, without sitting down. “A person very highly placed in our brotherhood has solicited for you to be received into the brotherhood before the fixed term, and has suggested that I be your sponsor. I consider it my sacred duty to fulfill the will of this person. Do you wish, under my sponsorship, to enter the brotherhood of Freemasons?”
“Can it be me, that ‘baby girl’ (as everybody said of me),” thought Natasha, “can it be that from this moment on I’m a wife,  equal to this strange, dear, intelligent man, whom even my father respects? Can it be true? Can it be true that now there is to be no more toying with life, that I’m grown up now, that responsibility is laid upon me now for my every deed and word? Ah, what was it he asked me?”
“If there was treason and there were proofs of his secret communications with Napoleon, they would be made public,” he said heatedly and hastily. “Personally I don’t like and have never liked Speransky, but I do like justice.” Pierre now recognized in his friend the all too familiar need to worry and argue about things extraneous to him, only in order to stifle his all too painful innermost thoughts.
“Can it be that he’s my husband, precisely this stranger, this handsome, kind man—above all, kind,” thought Princess Marya, and fear, which hardly ever came to her, came over her now. She was afraid to look around; she fancied someone was standing there behind the screen, in the dark corner. And that someone was he—the devil—and he was this man with the white forehead, black eyebrows, and red mouth.
“Why ask me? General Armfelt has suggested a beautiful position, with an exposed rear. Or the attack von diesem italienischen Herrn, sehr sch&#246;n! *422 Or a retreat. Auch gut. †423 Why ask me?” he said. “You yourselves know everything better than I.” But when Volkonsky, frowning, said that he was asking his opinion on behalf of the sovereign, Pfuel stood up and, suddenly animated, began to speak:
“Are you going to see Count Kirill Vladimirovich, ma ch&#232;re? ” the count asked from the dining room, also coming out to the front hall. “If he’s better, invite Pierre to dine with us. He used to come here, danced with the children. Invite him without fail, ma ch&#232;re.  Well, we’ll see how Taras distinguishes himself today. He says that Count Orlov had no such dinners as we’re going to have.”
They had not seen each other for nearly half a year; and at their age, when young men take their first steps on life’s path, they both found enormous changes in each other, totally new reflections of the society in which they had taken their first steps in life. Both had changed greatly since their last meeting, and both wanted the sooner to show each other the changes that had taken place in them.
“At once. &#192; propos, ” she added, calming down again, “I’ll have two very interesting men here tonight, le vicomte de Mortemart, il est alli&#233; aux Montmorency par les Rohan, †10 one of the best French families. He’s one of the good &#233;migr&#233;s,8 one of the real ones. And then l’abb&#233; Morio ‡11 —do you know that profound mind? He’s been received by the sovereign. Do you know him?”
“If Bonaparte remains on the throne of France for another year,” the viscount continued the new conversation, with the air of a man who does not listen to others, but, in matters known better to him than to anyone else, follows only the train of his own thoughts, “things will go too far. Intrigues, coercion, banishments, executions will forever destroy French society—I mean good society—and then…”
And Natasha, spreading her big mouth and looking perfectly ugly, started howling like a baby, not knowing the reason why, only because Sonya was crying. Sonya wanted to raise her head and reply, but could not and buried herself still more. Natasha wept, sitting on the blue featherbed and embracing her friend. Gathering her forces, Sonya sat up and began wiping away her tears and telling her story.
“I know,” Bilibin interrupted, “you think it’s very easy to capture marshals while sitting on a sofa in front of a fireplace. That’s true, but even so, why didn’t you capture him? And don’t be surprised if not only the minister of war, but the most august emperor and king Franz is not made very happy by your victory; nor do I, a miserable secretary of the Russian embassy, feel any particular joy…”
And the loquacious Dolgorukov, turning now to Boris, now to Prince Andrei, told how Bonaparte, wishing to test Mark&#243;v, our ambassador, purposely dropped his handkerchief in front of him and stood there looking at him, probably expecting a service from Mark&#243;v, and how Mark&#243;v at once dropped his own handkerchief next to it and picked it up, without picking up Bonaparte’s handkerchief.
Bolkonsky made use of this time to go to Dolgorukov and find out the details of the action. Prince Andrei sensed that Kutuzov was upset and displeased about something, and that there was displeasure with him at headquarters, and that all the persons of the imperial headquarters used with him the tone of people who knew something that others did not, and therefore he wanted to talk with Dolgorukov.
Napoleon took out his snuffbox again, silently paced the room several times, and suddenly went up to Balashov unexpectedly, and with a slight smile, as confidently, quickly, and simply as if he was doing something not only important but pleasant to Balashov, raised his hand to the face of the forty-year-old Russian general and, taking him by the ear, pulled it slightly, smiling with his lips only.
“Her father is very rich and stingy. He lives in the country. You know, it’s the famous Prince Bolkonsky,9 already retired under the late emperor and nicknamed ‘the King of Prussia.’ He’s a very intelligent man, but an odd and difficult one. La pauvre petite est malheureuse comme les pierres. #22 She has a brother, Kutuzov’s adjutant, the one who recently married Lise Meinen. He’ll come tonight.”
Prince Andrei closed his eyes and turned away. Pierre, who had not taken his joyful, friendly eyes off Prince Andrei since he entered the drawing room, went up to him and took his arm. Prince Andrei, without turning around, wrinkled his face into a grimace, expressing vexation at whoever had taken his arm, but, seeing Pierre’s smiling face, suddenly smiled an unexpectedly kind and pleasant smile.
“Ah, you know him?” said Mme Peronsky. “I can’t bear him. Il fait &#224; pr&#233;sent la pluie et le beau temps. *347 And such boundless pride! Takes after his papa. Got in with Speransky, drafting some sort of projects. Look how he treats the ladies! She’s talking to him, and he turns away,” she said, pointing to him. “I’d give it to him, if he behaved with me the way he does with these ladies.”
They all dispersed. The uncle helped Natasha down from the horse and led her by the arm up the shaky plank steps of the porch. The house, unplastered, with timber walls, was not very clean inside—one could see that the aim of those living in it did not consist in keeping it spotless—but there were also no signs of neglect. The entryway smelled of fresh apples and was hung with wolf and fox pelts.
Boris stopped in the middle of the room, looking around, brushed some specks of dust off the sleeve of his uniform with his hand, and went up to a mirror, studying his handsome face. Natasha kept still, peeking from her ambush, waiting to see what he would do. He stood for some time before the mirror, smiled, and walked to the other door. Natasha was about to call him, but then changed her mind.
The next day the sovereign stayed at Wischau. The court physician Villiers was summoned to him several times. In headquarters and among the nearby troops the news spread that the sovereign was unwell. He had eaten nothing and slept poorly that night, as people close to him said. The cause of it was the strong impression made on the sovereign’s sensitive soul by the sight of the wounded and dead.
In the course of their long conversation on Wednesday evening, Speransky said more than once: “Among us  everything that lies outside the general level of inveterate habit is considered…” or, with a smile: “But we  want the wolves well-fed and the sheep safe…” or: “They  cannot understand it…” And all that with an expression which said: “We, you and I, understand what they  are and who we  are.”
Christmastime came and, besides the festal liturgy, besides the solemn and boring felicitations of the neighbors and the servants, besides the new dresses everybody put on, there was nothing special to mark it as Christmastime, yet in the windless twenty degrees of frost, in the bright, blinding sunlight of day and the starry winter light at night, one felt called upon to mark this time somehow.
“Les souverains? Je ne parle pas de la Russie,”  the viscount said courteously and hopelessly. “Les souverains, madame? Qu’ont-ils fait pour Louis XVI, pour la reine, pour madame Elisabeth? 15 Rien,”  he continued, growing animated. “Et croyez-moi, ils subissent la punition pour leur trahison de la cause des Bourbons. Les souverains? Ils envoient des ambassadeurs complimenter l’usurpateur.” †52
There was the rustle of a woman’s dress in the next room. Prince Andrei shook himself as if coming to his senses, and his face took on the same expression it had had in Anna Pavlovna’s drawing room. Pierre lowered his legs from the sofa. The princess came in. She had already changed to a house dress, but one just as elegant and fresh. Prince Andrei stood up, politely moving an armchair for her.
Trying to offend Weyrother as stingingly as he could in his amour propre as a military author, Langeron demonstrated that Bonaparte could easily attack, instead of being attacked, and thereby make this disposition totally useless. Weyrother responded to all his objections with a firm, contemptuous smile, obviously prepared beforehand for every objection, regardless of what might be said to him.
“Yes, if you put the question that way, it’s another matter,” said Prince Andrei. “I build a house and cultivate a garden, and you build hospitals. Both can serve to pass the time. But what’s right, what’s good—that is for the one who knows all to judge, not for us. Well, you want to argue,” he added, “so let’s argue.” They left the table and sat on the porch, which took the place of a balcony.
“What do I think? I’ve been listening to you. That is all so,” said Prince Andrei. “But you say, ‘Join our brotherhood, and we’ll show you the goal of life and the purpose of man and the laws that govern the world.’ But who are we? —just people. How do you know everything? How is it that I alone do not see what you see? You see the kingdom of the good and the true on earth, and I don’t see it.”
“No one is right, no one is wrong, so she’s not wrong either,” he thought. If Pierre did not consent at once to a reunion with his wife, it was only because, being in a state of anguish, he was not able to undertake anything. If his wife had come to him, he would not have sent her away. Was it not all the same, compared to what preoccupied Pierre, whether he lived or did not live with his wife?
“They barely managed to save the poor fellow,” the guest went on. “That’s how intelligently the son of Count Kirill Vladimirovich Bezukhov amuses himself!” she added. “And I heard he was so well-bred and intelligent. There’s what all this foreign upbringing leads to. I hope no one receives him here, despite his wealth. They wanted to introduce him to me. I decidedly refused: I have daughters.”
“A proposal has been made to me concerning you, miss,” he said, smiling unnaturally. “You have guessed, I believe,” he went on, “that Prince Vassily came here and brought with him his pupil” (for some reason Prince Nikolai Andreich called Anatole a pupil), “not just for my good pleasure. A proposal was made to me yesterday concerning you. And since you know my rules, I am referring it to you.”
The expression of annoyance had already disappeared from Boris’s face; evidently having reflected and decided what to do, he took him by both hands with a particular calm and led him to the neighboring room. Boris’s eyes, looking calmly and firmly at Rostov, were as if veiled by something, as if some sort of screen—the blue spectacles of convention—had been put on them. So it seemed to Rostov.
Hussars, ladies, witches, clowns, bears, clearing their throats and wiping their frost-covered faces in the front hall, came into the reception room, where candles were hastily lighted. The clown Dimmler and the lady Nikolai opened the dance. Surrounded by shouting children, the mummers, covering their faces and altering their voices, bowed before the hostess and took their places in the room.
Sitting in the drawing room and listening to this talk and gossip among the old men, Princess Marya understood nothing of what she heard; she was thinking only of whether the guests had noticed her father’s hostile attitude towards her. She did not even notice the special attention and courtesy shown her during that dinner by Drubetskoy, who was already visiting their house for the third time.
Dolokhov did not answer his company commander; he was involved in a heated argument with the French grenadier. They were talking, as they could only have been, about the campaign. The Frenchman, confusing the Austrians with the Russians, insisted that the Russians had surrendered and fled all the way from Ulm. Dolokhov insisted that the Russians had not surrendered, but had beaten the French.
At dawn on the seventeenth, a French officer was sent to Wischau from our outposts, who had come under a flag of truce, asking for a meeting with the Russian emperor. This officer was Savary. The sovereign had only just fallen asleep, and therefore Savary had to wait. At noon he was admitted to the sovereign, and an hour later he rode with Prince Dolgorukov to the outposts of the French army.
The stretchers began to move. At every jolt he again felt unbearable pain; his feverish state worsened, and he became delirious. Those reveries of his father, wife, sister, and future son, and the tenderness he had experienced on the night before the battle, the figure of the little, insignificant Napoleon, and the lofty sky over it all, constituted the main basis for his feverish imaginings.
In the month of June, the battle of Friedland took place,23 in which the Pavlogradsky regiment did not participate, and after it a truce was declared. Rostov, who painfully felt his friend’s absence, having no news of him since the time of his departure and worried about the course of his case and his wound, took advantage of the truce and obtained permission to visit Denisov in the hospital.
“Ah, vous exp&#233;diez le courrier, princesse, moi j’ai d&#233;j&#224; expedi&#233; le mien. J’ai &#233;cris &#224; ma pauvre m&#232;re,” *151 the smiling Mlle Bourienne spoke in a quick, pleasant, juicy little voice, swallowing her r ’s and bringing with her into the concentrated, sad, and dreary atmosphere of Princess Marya a completely different, frivolously gay and self-contented world.
He guessed his movements ahead of time, and felt merrier and merrier. He noticed a solitary tree ahead. This tree was first ahead of him, in the middle of the line that seemed so terrible. But then they crossed that line, and not only was there nothing frightening, but everything became merrier and livelier. “Oh, how I’m going to slash at him,” thought Rostov, gripping the hilt of his saber.
The curtain rose again. Anatole left the box calm and cheerful. Natasha returned to her father’s box, now totally subjected to the world she was in. Everything that was happening before her now seemed perfectly natural to her; but instead all her former thoughts about her fianc&#233;, about Princess Marya, about country life, never once entered her head, as if it was all long ago, long past.
“Not all, since you won’t be there; not all,” said Prince Ippolit, laughing joyfully, and, snatching the shawl from the footman, even shoving him, he began putting it on the princess. Either from awkwardness or intentionally (no one would have been able to tell), he was a long while lowering his arms, even when the shawl was already put on, and it was as if he was embracing the young woman.
Pierre started drinking glass after glass, looking from under his brows at the drunken guests, who again crowded by the window, and listening to their talk. Anatole poured the wine for him and told him that Dolokhov was making a bet with the Englishman Stevens, a sailor who was there, that he, Dolokhov, could drink a bottle of rum sitting in the third-floor window with his legs hanging out.
In the evening, left alone in a new place, he could not fall asleep for a long time. He read, then put out the candle, but lit it again. The room, with the shutters closed from inside, was hot. He was vexed with this stupid old man (as he called Rostov), who had detained him, assuring him that the necessary papers had not yet been brought from town, and vexed with himself for having stayed.
“Well, now for a declamation!” said Speransky, coming out of his study. “An astonishing talent!” he said to Prince Andrei. Magnitsky at once assumed a pose and began to recite humorous verses he had composed in French about certain persons well-known in Petersburg, and was interrupted several times by applause. When the verses were over, Prince Andrei went up to Speransky to take his leave.
Prince Andrei was standing before her with a solicitously tender expression and saying something to her. She, having raised her head, was looking at him, blushing deeply and clearly trying to restrain her fitful breathing. And the bright light of some inner fire, previously extinguished, again burned in her. She was quite transformed. From plain she again became as she had been at the ball.
When Pierre returned to Moscow, he was handed a letter from Marya Dmitrievna, who asked him to come to her on a very important matter concerning Andrei Bolkonsky and his fianc&#233;e. Pierre had been avoiding Natasha. It seemed to him that he had a stronger feeling for her than a married man ought to have for his friend’s fianc&#233;e. Yet some sort of fate constantly brought them together.
“Consider my position, Pyotr Nikolaich: if I were in the cavalry, I’d get no more than two hundred roubles every four months, even with the rank of sublieutenant; while now I get two hundred and thirty,” he said with a joyful, pleasant smile, looking at Shinshin and the count as though it was obvious to him that his success would always constitute the chief goal of everyone else’s desires.
When Prince Andrei went to the room prepared for him and lay down on the featherbed and fragrant, warmed-up pillows in clean linen—he felt that the battle, the news of which he had brought, was far, far away from him. The Prussian alliance, the treachery of Austria, the new triumph of Bonaparte, the levee, and the parade, and his reception by the emperor Franz the next day preoccupied him.
Bagration called to the officer, and Tushin went over to the general, putting three fingers to his visor in a timid and awkward movement, not as military men salute, but as priests bless. Though Tushin’s guns were meant to be shooting into the hollow, he was sending fireballs at the village of Sch&#246;ngraben visible straight ahead, before which large masses of French were moving forward.
Princess Marya did not think at all or even remember about her face and hairstyle. The handsome, open face of the man who would perhaps be her husband absorbed all her attention. To her he seemed kind, brave, resolute, manly, and magnanimous. She was convinced of it. Thousands of fancies of her future family life kept emerging in her imagination. She drove them away and tried to hide them.
Here, however, is some sort of magical forest with flowing dark shadows and the sparkle of diamonds, and with flights of some sort of marble steps, and magical buildings with some sort of silver roofs, and the piercing shrieks of some sort of animals. “And if this is indeed Melyukovka, then it’s all the more strange that we drove God knows where and arrived at Melyukovka,” thought Nikolai.
Anna Mikhailovna, who often visited the Karagins and played cards with the mother, meanwhile obtained trustworthy information about what would come with Julie (what would come were the two Penza estates and the woodlands in Nizhni Novgorod province). Anna Mikhailovna, given over to the will of providence, looked with tenderness upon the refined sorrow that bound her son to the rich Julie.
“I’m another matter. Why talk of me! I do not and cannot wish for any other life, because I don’t know any other life. But think, Andr&#233;, for a young and worldly woman, in the best years of her life, to be buried in the country, alone, because papa’s always busy, and I…you know me…how poor I am en ressources,  for a woman accustomed to the best society. Mademoiselle Bourienne alone…”
On the eighteenth and nineteenth of November, the troops made two more marches forward, and the enemy’s outposts retreated after brief exchanges of fire. In the highest spheres of the army, an intense, bustlingly agitated movement began from noon of the nineteenth, continuing until the morning of the next day, the twentieth of November, when the memorable battle of Austerlitz took place.
“I’ve never enjoyed myself so much in my life!” she said, and Prince Andrei noticed how her thin arms rose quickly to embrace her father and at once dropped again. Natasha was happier than she had ever been before in her life. She was in that highest degree of happiness when a person becomes perfectly kind and good, and does not believe in the possibility of evil, unhappiness, and grief.
Natasha had made a strong impression on Kuragin. Over supper after the theater, in the manner of a connoisseur, he analyzed for Dolokhov the merits of her arms, shoulders, feet, and hair, and announced his decision to dangle after her a bit. What the result of this courtship might be, Anatole could not reflect upon or know, as he never knew what the result of any of his actions would be.
Kutuzov turned away. The same smile of the eyes flashed over his face as when he had turned away from Captain Timokhin. He turned away and winced, as if wishing to express thereby that all that Dolokhov had said to him and all that he could say had long, long been known to him, that it all bored him, and that it was all by no means what was needed. He turned away and made for the coach.
“Me?…To Petersburg,” Pierre replied in a childish, irresolute voice. “Thank you. I agree with you in everything. But don’t think that I’m so bad. I wish with all my soul to be what you want me to be; but I’ve never found help from anybody…However, I am to blame for it all in the first place. Help me, teach me, and maybe I’ll…” Pierre could not go on; he snuffed his nose and turned away.
Two minutes had not gone by before Prince Vassily, in his kaftan with three stars, holding his head high, majestically entered the room. He seemed to have grown thinner since morning; his eyes were larger than usual as he looked around and saw Pierre. He went over to him, took his hand (something he had never done before), and pulled it down, as if testing whether it was well attached.
“But he, Ippolit, didn’t he tell you?” said Prince Vassily, turning to his son and seizing the princess by the hand as if she was about to run away and he had barely managed to hold her back, “didn’t he tell you how he himself, Ippolit, pined for the dear princess and how she le mettait &#224; la porte? Oh! C’est la perle des femmes, princesse! ”*247 he said, turning to Princess Marya.
The old countess, never letting go of his hand, which she kissed every other moment, sat next to him; the rest clustered around them, catching his every movement, word, gaze, and not taking their rapturously loving eyes off him. His brother and sisters argued, and snatched the places nearest to him from each other, and fought over who was going to bring him tea, a handkerchief, a pipe.
In the fourth category, finally, there were also a great many brothers, especially those who had entered the brotherhood recently. These were people who, from Pierre’s observation, did not believe in anything, did not desire anything, and joined the Masons only to be close to the rich young brothers, powerful through their connections and nobility, of whom there were many in the lodge.
Julie was especially affectionate with Boris: she was sorry for his early disappointment in life, offering him what consolations of friendship she could offer, having suffered so much in life herself, and she opened her album for him.8 Boris drew two trees in her album and wrote: “Arbres rustiques, vos sombres rameaux secouent sur moi les t&#233;n&#232;bres et la m&#233;lancolie.” †367
“I saw him myself,” said the orderly with a self-assured grin. “I ought to know the sovereign by now: seems I saw him lots of times in Petersburg this close. He was sitting in the carriage pale as can be. Four black horses, saints alive, how they went rattling past us: seems I ought to know the tsar’s horses and Ilya Ivanych by now; seems Ilya the coachman drives nobody but the tsar.”
Prince Andrei sensed in Natasha the presence of a special world, completely foreign to him, filled with joys of a sort as yet unknown to him, that foreign world which even then, in the Otradnoe avenue and at the window on that moonlit night, had enticed him so. Now that world no longer enticed him, it was no longer foreign; but he himself, having entered it, found in it a new delight.
Natasha said nothing, out of shyness, as Marya Dmitrievna thought, but, in reality, Natasha disliked any interference in the matter of her love for Prince Andrei, which appeared to her so set apart from all human affairs that no one, to her mind, could understand it. She loved and knew only Prince Andrei; he loved her and was to come one day soon and take her. She needed nothing else.
“Mean, shameless girl,” she said to her. “I don’t want to hear anything!” She pushed back Natasha, who looked at her with astonished but dry eyes, locked her in with a key, and, having ordered the yard porter to let in the people who would be coming that evening, but not to let them out, and the valet to bring those people to her, she sat in the drawing room waiting for the abductors.
The elder princess dropped the portfolio. Anna Mikhailovna quickly bent down and, picking up the disputed object, ran to the bedroom. The elder princess and Prince Vassily came to their senses and followed her. A few minutes later, the elder princess was the first to come out, with a pale and dry face, biting her lower lip. At the sight of Pierre, her face showed irrepressible spite.
Rostov lay down again on his bed and thought with pleasure: “Let him fuss and bustle now, I’ve done my job and I’m lying down—that’s splendid!” Through the wall he heard that, besides the sergeant major, Lavrushka, Denisov’s pert and roguish lackey, was also talking. Lavrushka was telling something about some sort of wagons, biscuits, and oxen he had seen when he went for provisions.
Nikolai had never seen Ilagin, but, as usual, knowing no middle way in his opinions and feelings, judging by the rumors of this landowner’s violence and willfulness, hated him with all his heart and considered him his bitterest enemy. He was now riding to him in angry agitation, firmly gripping his whip and fully prepared for the most resolute and dangerous actions against his enemy.
“No you don’t, master,” he cried to Nikolai. Nikolai sent his horses into a gallop and outstripped Zakhar. The horses sent a spray of fine, dry snow into the faces of the passengers; beside them was a rapid tinkling of bells and the tangle of quickly moving legs and shadows of the troika they were outstripping. From all sides came women’s shrieks and the whistle of runners over snow.
When they had finished coffee after the liturgy, in the drawing room, where the dustcovers had been removed, it was announced to Marya Dmitrievna that the carriage was ready, and she, with a stern look, dressed in the fancy shawl in which she went visiting, stood up and declared that she was going to see Prince Nikolai Andreevich Bolkonsky, to have a talk with him concerning Natasha.
“Your cockiness is dear to you, you don’t feel like apologizing,” the staff captain went on, “but for us old-timers, since we’ve grown up and, God willing, will die serving in the regiment, the honor of the regiment is dear to us, and Bogdanych knows it. Oh, how dear it is! And this is not good, not good. Whether it offends you or not, I always speak the plain truth. It’s not good!”
Meanwhile, Nesvitsky, Zherkov, and the officer of the suite stood together out of the range of fire and looking at this small bunch of men in yellow shakos, dark green jackets embroidered with cord, and blue breeches, pottering about by the bridge and, on the other side, at blue coats and groups with horses, which could easily be identified as artillery, approaching in the distance.
“What do you think?” Vera said with a subtle smile. “You’re so perceptive, Prince, and understand people’s characters so well at once. What do you think about Natalie? Can she be constant in her attachments? Can she, like other women” (Vera meant herself), “fall in love with a man once and remain faithful to him forever? That is what I consider real love. What do you think, Prince?”
Whether playing with the ring, the string, or the rouble coin, or talking as they were now, Nikolai never left Sonya’s side and looked at her with totally new eyes. It seemed to him that it was only today, for the first time, owing to that cork mustache, that he had known her fully. Indeed, that evening Sonya was merrier, livelier, and prettier than Nikolai had ever seen her before.
“They don’t hear…I told them twice!…they don’t hear! She’s the first person in this house; she’s my best friend,” cried the prince. “And,” he shouted wrathfully, addressing Princess Marya for the first time, “if you allow yourself once more, as you did yesterday…to forget yourself before her, I’ll show you who is master in this house. Out! I don’t want to see you! Apologize to her!”
Both were silent; there were two Germans in the room and a Russian officer. Everyone was silent, and only the clank of knives against plates was heard and the lieutenant’s chomping. When Telyanin finished his lunch, he took a double purse from his pocket, opened the clasp with his small, white, upturned fingers, took out a gold coin and, raising his eyebrows, gave it to the waiter.
Just as Boris came in, Prince Andrei, narrowing his eyes disdainfully (with that particular air of polite weariness which says clearly that, were it not my duty, I would not talk with you for a minute), was listening to an old Russian general with decorations, who, drawn up almost on tiptoe, with an obsequious soldierly expression on his purple face, was reporting something to him.
H&#233;l&#232;ne joyfully welcomed Natasha and loudly admired her beauty and her attire. Soon after their arrival, Mlle George left the room to get dressed. In the drawing room they began arranging chairs and sitting down. Anatole moved a chair for Natasha and was about to sit next to her, but the count, who never took his eyes off Natasha, sat next to her. Anatole sat behind them.
“Very glad to see you. Go in where they’ve assembled, and wait for me.” The sovereign went to the study. He was followed by Prince Pyotr Mikhailovich Volkonsky and Baron Stein, and the doors closed behind them. Prince Andrei, taking advantage of the sovereign’s permission, went, along with Paulucci, whom he had known in Turkey, into the drawing room where the council was assembled.
Marya Genrikhovna was the wife of the regimental doctor, a young, pretty German woman, whom the doctor had married in Poland. Either because he lacked means, or because he did not want to part with a young wife so early in their marriage, the doctor took her along everywhere with the hussar regiment, and his jealousy had become a habitual subject of jokes among the hussar officers.
Rostov watched what was happening before him as if it was a hunting scene. He sensed intuitively that if he were now to strike the French dragoons with his hussars, they would not hold out; but if he were to strike, it would have to be now, at this moment, otherwise it would be too late. He looked around. A captain was standing next to him, his eyes also fixed on the cavalry below.
The sound of the church singing ceased, and the voice of the clerical person was heard deferentially congratulating the sick man with having received the sacrament. The sick man went on lying in the same way, lifelessly and motionlessly. Around him everyone stirred, footsteps and whispers were heard, among which the whisper of Anna Mikhailovna stood out more sharply than the rest.
Between each kind of troops was a sort of street. The three parts of this army could be clearly distinguished from each other: Kutuzov’s fighting force (in which the Pavlogradsky regiment stood on the right flank in the front line), the infantry and guards regiments come from Russia, and the Austrian troops. But they all stood in one line, under one command, and in the same order.
And, having glanced at the adjutant, the regimental commander walked with his bouncing gait towards the regiment. It was clear that he liked his own irritation and that he wanted to walk the length of the regiment and find more pretexts for his wrath. Having snapped at one officer for an unpolished insignia, and another for an unevenness in one rank, he came to the third company.
But it was she, in a new dress, unfamiliar to him, which must have been made in his absence. Everyone let him go, and he ran to her. When they came together, she fell on his breast, weeping. She could not lift her face, and only pressed it to the cold cords of his Hungarian jacket. Denisov, unnoticed by anyone, came into the room, stood there, and rubbed his eyes looking at them.
Nesvitsky was there as an old member of the club. Pierre, who, on his wife’s orders, had let his hair grow long and removed his spectacles, was fashionably dressed, but walked about the rooms with a sad and dejected air. As everywhere, he was surrounded by an atmosphere of people who bowed before his wealth, and he treated them with a habitual lordliness and absentminded disdain.
It was the second night that the two of them had not slept, looking after the boy, who was burning with fever. For two whole days, not trusting their house doctor and expecting the one they had sent for from town, they had been trying now one, now another remedy. Worn out by sleeplessness and anxiety, they shifted their grief onto each other, reproached each other, and quarreled.
The steward, a very stupid but cunning man, understood the intelligent but na&#239;ve count perfectly and played with him as with a toy. When he saw the effect these prearranged receptions had on Pierre, he addressed him more resolutely with arguments about the impossibility and, above all, the needlessness of emancipating the peasants, who were perfectly happy even without that.
In the front hall the outside door opened, someone asked, “Are they at home?” and someone’s footsteps were heard. Natasha was looking in the mirror, but did not see herself. She was listening to the sounds in the front hall. When she did see herself, her face was pale. It was he.  She knew it for certain, though she had barely heard the sound of his voice through the closed door.
She sat down at the table and listened to the conversation of the older people and of Nikolai, who had also come to the table. “My God, my God, the same faces, the same conversations, papa holding his cup in the same way and blowing in exactly the same way!” thought Natasha, horrified at the feeling of revulsion rising in her against the whole household for being always the same.
“Ah, I know that. I know, I know,” Natasha picked up. “I was still little when it happened to me. Remember, I was punished once for the plums, and you were all dancing, but I sat in the schoolroom and cried. I cried so much, I’ll never forget it. I felt sad, and sorry for everybody, myself and everybody else. And the main thing was that I wasn’t guilty,” said Natasha, “remember?”
When Princess Marya came back from her father, the little princess was sitting over her work, and she looked at Princess Marya with that special expression of an inward and happily serene gaze that only pregnant women have. It was clear that she did not see Princess Marya, but was looking deep inside herself—into something happy and mysterious that was being accomplished in her.
Natasha, fearing that her brother would do something terrible in his agitation, followed not far behind him. Seeing the enemies greet each other amicably, she rode up to them. Ilagin raised his beaver cap still higher before Natasha and, smiling pleasantly, said that the countess represented Diana5 both in her passion for hunting and in her beauty, of which he had heard so much.
“Quite different and yet the same,” thought Nikolai, looking at her face all lit up by the moonlight. He slipped his hands under the coat that covered her head, embraced her, pressed her to him, and kissed her on the lips, which had a mustache on them and smelled of burnt cork. Sonya kissed him right in the middle of the lips and, freeing her small hands, put them to his cheeks.
The two remarkably pretty girls, Natasha and Sonya, along with Count Ilya Andreich, who had not appeared in Moscow for a long time, attracted general attention. Besides, everyone knew vaguely of Natasha’s betrothal to Prince Andrei, knew that since then the Rostovs had been living in the country, and looked with curiosity at the fianc&#233;e of one of the best matches in Russia.
“How she blushes, how she blushes, ma d&#233;licieuse! ” said H&#233;l&#232;ne. “Be sure to come. Si vous aimez quelqu’un, ma d&#233;licieuse, ce n’est pas une raison pour se clo&#238;trer. Si m&#234;me vous &#234;tes promise, je suis s&#251;r que votre promis aurais d&#233;sir&#233; que vous alliez dans le monde en son absence plut&#244;t que de d&#233;p&#233;rir d’ennui. ”†382
Rostov rode at a walk, not knowing why and to whom he was going now. The sovereign was wounded, the battle lost. It was impossible not to believe it now. Rostov rode in the direction indicated to him and in which he could see a tower and a church in the distance. Why should he hurry? What was he to say now to the sovereign or to Kutuzov, even if they were alive and not wounded?
“Oh! it’s terrible to feel myself so much in this man’s power,” thought Rostov. Rostov knew what a blow he would deal to his father, to his mother, in announcing this loss; he knew what happiness it would be to be delivered of it all, and he realized that Dolokhov knew he could deliver him from this shame and grief, but still wanted to play with him as a cat plays with a mouse.
Denisov rode to the staff straight from the regimental commander, with a sincere wish to follow his advice. In the evening he returned to his dugout in such a state as Rostov had never yet seen him in. Denisov could not speak and was gasping for breath. When Rostov asked what was the matter with him, he only uttered incomprehensible oaths and threats in a hoarse and weak voice.
“His majesty drew his attention to the grenadier division and the ceremonial march past,” the general went on, “and the ambassador supposedly paid no attention to it and supposedly allowed himself to say that ‘we in France pay no attention to such trifles.’ The sovereign did not deign to reply. At the next review, they say, the sovereign did not deign to address him even once.”
But while Nikolai was working out all these questions within himself, still without giving himself a clear accounting of what confused him so much, the wheel of fortune of military service, as often happens, turned in his favor. After the Ostrovna action he was promoted, was given a battalion of hussars, and whenever a brave officer was called for, the mission was given to him.
He began to listen, and heard the sounds of approaching hoofbeats and the sound of voices speaking French. He opened his eyes. Over him again was that same lofty sky with floating clouds rising still higher, through which showed the blue of infinity. He did not turn his head and did not see those who, judging by the sounds of hoofs and voices, had ridden up to him and stopped.
The next day the prince did not say a word to his daughter; but she noticed that over dinner he ordered the food served starting with Mlle Bourienne. At the end of dinner, when the butler, out of old habit, again served the coffee starting with the princess, the prince suddenly flew into a rage, flung his cane at Filipp, and at once gave orders for him to be sent as a soldier.
Natasha involuntarily gazed at that neck, the shoulders, the pearls, the coiffure, and admired the beauty of the shoulders and pearls. As Natasha looked at her a second time, the lady turned and, meeting Count Ilya Andreich’s eyes, nodded to him and smiled. This was Countess Bezukhov, Pierre’s wife. Ilya Andreich, who knew everybody in the world, leaned over and addressed her.
On returning from leave, joyfully welcomed by his comrades, Nikolai had been sent for a remount and had brought excellent horses from Little Russia, which pleased him and earned him the praises of his superiors. During his absence, he had been promoted to captain, and when the regiment was put on wartime status with an increased complement, he was again given his old squadron.
“He chose his acquaintances poorly,” Princess Anna Mikhailovna mixed in. “Prince Vassily’s son, he and a certain Dolokhov, they say, were up to God knows what. And they’ve both suffered for it. Dolokhov has been broken to the ranks, and Bezukhov’s son has been banished to Moscow. As for Anatole Kuragin—his father somehow hushed it up. But they did banish him from Petersburg.”
Sonya, brushing off feathers, and hiding the verses in her bosom, near her neck with its protruding collarbones, her face flushed, went running after Natasha with light, merry steps down the corridor to the sitting room. At the request of the guests, the young people sang the quartet “The Spring,” which everyone liked very much. Then Nikolai sang a song he had just learned:38
Having seen the commander in chief off, Prince Vassily sat by himself on a chair in the hall, his legs crossed high up, his elbow resting on his knee, his hand over his eyes. Having sat like that for some time, he got up and, with unhabitually hurried steps, looking around with frightened eyes, went down the long corridor to the rear half of the house, to the eldest princess.
The sick man was so surrounded by doctors, princesses, and servants that Pierre could no longer see the reddish-yellow head with its gray mane, which, though he did see other faces, had never once left his sight during the whole service. By the cautious movements of the people standing around the armchair, Pierre guessed that the dying man was being lifted up and transferred.
“I am wounded, I cannot mount a horse, and therefore cannot command an army. You have brought your crushed corps d’arm&#233;e  to Pultusk: here it is exposed, without firewood, and without forage, and thus in need of help, and since you yourself were in touch with Count Buxh&#246;wden yesterday, thought should be given to retreating to our border, which should be done today.”
In the eyes of the world, Pierre was a great lord, the somewhat blind and ridiculous husband of a famous wife, an intelligent eccentric, a do-nothing, but one who harmed nobody, a nice and kind fellow. Yet in Pierre’s soul all that time a complex and difficult work of inner development was taking place, which revealed much to him and led him to many spiritual doubts and joys.
“Those people who sacrificed everything for him,” the princess picked up, again trying to rise, but the prince did not let her, “something he was never able to appreciate. No, mon cousin, ” she added with a sigh, “I shall remember that one can expect no reward in this world, that in this world there is neither honor nor justice. One must be cunning and wicked in this world.”
Princess Marya came to her father’s door that day with particular trepidation. It seemed to her not only that everyone knew her fate was to be decided that day, but that they also knew what she thought about it. She read that expression on the face of Tikhon, and on the face of Prince Vassily’s valet, who met her in the corridor while carrying hot water and bowed low to her.
On hearing gunfire in the vanguard, the young emperor could not restrain his desire to be present at the battle, and, despite all the remonstrations of his courtiers, at noon, having separated from the third column with which he was proceeding, he rode to the vanguard. Before he reached the hussars, several adjutants met him with news of the successful outcome of the action.
On one of his estates of three hundred souls, the peasants were registered as free plowmen (this was one of the first examples in Russia), on some others the corv&#233;e was replaced by quitrent.2 A trained midwife was invited to Bogucharovo at his expense to help women in childbirth, and a priest was paid to teach the children of the peasants and servants to read and write.
“Ah, it’s impossible to recognize them! And Natasha! See what she looks like! She really looks like somebody. And Edward Karlych is something! I didn’t recognize him. How well he dances! Ah, dear me, there’s a Circassian here, too; it really suits you, Sonyushka. And who’s this one? Well, how amusing! Nikita, Vanya, take the tables away. And we were sitting here so quietly!”
All of Pierre’s cheerfulness vanished. He asked the princess worried questions, begged her to tell him everything, to confide her grief to him; but she only repeated that she begged him to forget what she had said, that she did not remember what she had said, that she had no grief except the one he knew—that Prince Andrei’s marriage threatened to make father and son quarrel.
“Buonaparte?” Bilibin said questioningly, wrinkling his forehead and with that letting it be felt that a mot  was coming. “Buonaparte?” he said with special emphasis on the u . “I think, however, that now that he’s prescribing laws for Austria from Sch&#246;nbrunn, il faut lui faire gr&#226;ce de l ’u. I decidedly make an innovation and call him Bonaparte tout court. ”§200
Prince Andrei always became especially animated when he had to guide a young man and help him towards worldly success. Under the pretext of this help for another, which out of pride he would never accept for himself, he found himself close to the milieu which conferred success and which attracted him. He took up Boris quite willingly and went with him to Prince Dolgorukov.
In the fresh morning air, the shooting was no longer as before—at irregular intervals, two or three gunshots, then one or two cannon shots—now on the slopes of the hills before Pratz one could hear rolling salvos of musket fire, interrupted by such rapid cannon fire that at times the separate shots could not be distinguished from each other, but merged into a general roar.
Following the letter, one of the brother Masons he respected less than the others broke in upon Pierre’s solitude and, turning the conversation to Pierre’s marital relations, in the guise of brotherly advice came out with the thought that his severity towards his wife was unjust, and that Pierre was departing from the primary rules of Masonry in not forgiving the penitent.
They rode through the village of Rykonty, past French hussar tethering posts, sentinels, and soldiers, who saluted their colonel and looked with curiosity at the Russian uniform, and came out on the other side of the village. According to the colonel, they were a mile and a half from the commander of the division, who would receive Balashov and take him to his destination.
Rostov saw the prisoners being taken away and rode after them to look at his Frenchman with the dimple in his chin. He was sitting in his strange uniform on a spare hussar horse and looking around uneasily. The wound on his arm was almost not a wound. He feigned a smile at Rostov and waved to him by way of greeting. Rostov still felt awkward and as if ashamed of something.
“Le vicomte a &#233;t&#233; personellement connu de monseigneur,”  Anna Pavlovna whispered to one. “Le vicomte est un parfait conteur,”  she said to another. “Comme on voit l’homme de la bonne compagnie,” †35 she said to a third; and the viscount was presented to the company in a most refined and advantageous light, like a roast beef on a hot platter sprinkled with herbs.
And with that impeccable official memory peculiar to him, he repeated the introductory words of the manifesto: “…and the desire, which constitutes the sole and absolute aim of the sovereign, to establish peace in Europe on firm foundations, led to his present decision to move part of the army abroad and to make further efforts towards the achievement of that intention.”34
“Well, ma’am,” the old man began, bending close to his daughter over the notebook and putting one arm on the back of the chair in which the princess was sitting, so that the princess felt herself surrounded on all sides by her father’s smell of tobacco and pungent old age, which she had known so long. “Well, ma’am, these triangles are similar; kindly look, the angle ABC…”
“The enemy has put out his fires, and a continual noise is heard from his camp,” he said. “What does that mean? Either he is retreating, which is the one thing we should fear, or he is changing his position” (he smiled). “But even if he takes up a position in Thuerassa, he is only saving us a great deal of trouble, and all orders, to the smallest detail, remain the same.”
Pierre began telling about what he had done on his estates, trying as far as possible to hide his own share in the improvements he had made. Prince Andrei prompted Pierre beforehand several times in what he was telling, as if everything Pierre had done was a long-known story, and he listened not only without interest, but even as if ashamed at what Pierre was telling him.
The next morning Marya Dmitrievna took the girls to the Iverskaya Chapel and to Mme Aubert-Chalmet, who was so afraid of Marya Dmitrievna that she always let her have dresses for less, so as to get rid of her quickly. Marya Dmitrievna ordered almost the whole trousseau. On coming home, she drove everyone but Natasha out of the room and called her favorite to her armchair.
Pierre dined at the club that day and heard talk on all sides about the attempted abduction of Miss Rostov, and he stubbornly refuted that talk, assuring everyone that there was nothing more to it than that his brother-in-law had made a proposal to the Rostovs and received a refusal. Pierre felt it was his duty to conceal the whole affair and restore Natasha’s reputation.
The horse guards galloped, but still holding back their horses. Rostov could now see their faces and heard the command “Forward, forward!” uttered by an officer, letting his thoroughbred go at full speed. Rostov, afraid of being trampled or swept into the attack on the French, galloped along the front as hard as his horse could go, and still did not manage to avoid them.
Natasha’s prediction was proving true. Dolokhov, who did not like the society of women, began to frequent their house, and the question of whom he was doing it for was soon resolved (though no one spoke of it), in the sense that he was doing it for Sonya. And Sonya knew it, though she would never have dared to say it, and she flushed crimson every time Dolokhov appeared.
Prince Andrei, looking straight ahead, listened silently to Pierre’s speech. A few times he asked Pierre to repeat words he had not heard because of the noise of the carriage. By a particular gleam that lit up in Prince Andrei’s eyes, and by his silence, Pierre saw that his words were not in vain, that Prince Andrei would not interrupt him or laugh at what he was saying.
But before he reached them, Bezukhov stopped beside a very handsome dark-haired man of medium height, in a white uniform, who was standing by a window talking to a tall man with stars and a sash. Natasha immediately recognized the young man of medium height in the white uniform: it was Bolkonsky, who seemed to her to have grown younger, more cheerful, and better looking.
Only now, at the sight of his dread superiors, did Tushin realize in all its horror his guilt and disgrace at having remained alive while losing two guns. He had been so agitated that until that moment he had not managed to think of it. The laughter of the officers threw him off still more. He stood before Bagration with a trembling lower jaw and was barely able to say:
The whole day had been hot, there was a thunderstorm gathering somewhere, but only a small cloud had sent a sprinkle over the dust of the road and the juicy leaves. The left side of the woods was dark, in the shade; the right side, wet, glossy, sparkled in the sun, barely swayed by the wind. Everything was in flower; nightingales throbbed and trilled, now near, now far.
“Assure the emperor Alexander on my behalf,” he said, taking his hat, “that I am as devoted to him as before: I know him perfectly and value his lofty qualities very highly. Je ne vous retiens plus, g&#233;n&#233;ral, vous recevrez ma lettre &#224; l’Empereur. ”†412 And Napoleon quickly went to the door. Everyone in the reception room rushed forward and down the stairs.
“Non plus. Cela met la cour dans de trop mauvais draps,”  Bilibin went on. “Ce n’est ni trahison, ni l&#226;chet&#233;, ni b&#234;tise; c’est comme &#224; Ulm…”  It was as if he fell to pondering, searching for a phrase: “C’est…c’est du Mack. Nous somme mack&#233;s,” †213 he concluded, feeling that he had uttered a mot,  and a fresh mot,  a mot  that would be repeated.
What was going on in that childishly receptive soul, so greedily grasping and absorbing all the diverse impressions of life? How did it all get laid away in her? But she was very happy. As they drove up to the house, she began to sing the tune of the song “Late that evening in the wood,” the melody she had been trying to get all the while they rode and finally did get.
Le petit caporal…Je l’ai vue donner la croix &#224; l’un des vieux…Vive l’Empereur!…” *394 said the voices of old and young men of the most diverse characters and social positions. The faces of all these men had one common expression of joy at the beginning of the long-awaited campaign and of rapture and devotion to the man in the gray frock coat who stood on the hill.
Bagration, knowing Bolkonsky to be a favorite and trusted adjutant, received him with a superior officer’s special distinction and indulgence, explained to him that there would probably be a battle that day or the next, and allowed him full freedom to stay by him during the battle or to supervise the order of retreat in the rear guard, “which was also very important.”
“Who’s there? Why? Wait!” Anatole’s face seemed to say. Princess Marya was looking at them silently. She could not understand it. Finally Mlle Bourienne gave a little cry and ran away. Anatole, with a merry smile, bowed to Princess Marya, as if inviting her to laugh at this odd incident, and, shrugging his shoulders, went to the door that led to his part of the house.
Dolokhov dined frequently with the Rostovs, never missed a play when they went, and attended the balls for adolescentes *286 at Iogel’s, where the Rostovs always went. He paid most attention to Sonya and looked at her with such eyes that not only was she unable to endure that gaze without turning red, but even the old countess and Natasha blushed when they noticed it.
“Mais charmante!” *374 he said, evidently about Natasha, as she did not so much hear as understand from the movement of his lips. Then he walked to the front row and sat down next to Dolokhov, nudging with his elbow in a friendly and casual way that same Dolokhov whom others treated so fawningly. He smiled at him with a merry wink and rested his foot against the rail.
Balashov inclined his head, showing by his look that he would have liked to bow out, and was listening only because he could not help listening to what was said to him. Napoleon did not notice that expression; he addressed Balashov not as his enemy’s envoy, but as a man who was now entirely devoted to him and was supposed to be glad of his former master’s humiliation.
Nesvitsky, guffawing, put his arm around Prince Andrei, but Bolkonsky, turning still more pale, with an angry expression on his face, pushed him away and turned to Zherkov. The nervous irritation he had felt at the sight of Mack, the news of his defeat, and the thought of what awaited the Russian army now found its outlet in his anger at Zherkov’s inappropriate joke.
“I would not be fulfilling my duty, Count,” he said in a timid voice, “and would not justify the trust and honor you have shown me by choosing me as your second, if I did not tell you the whole truth at this important, this very important, moment. I think this affair has no sufficient grounds and is not worth shedding blood over…You were wrong, you lost your temper…”
“No help for it! It happens to everybody,” his son said in a careless, brazen tone, while in his soul he considered himself a villain, a scoundrel, whose whole life would not be enough to redeem his crime. He would have liked to kiss his father’s hands, to go to his knees and ask forgiveness, yet he said in a careless and even rude tone that it happened to everybody.
“Typhus, my lad. Anyone who comes here is a dead man. There’s only the two of us, me and Makeev” (he pointed to the assistant) “still hanging on here. Five of our fellow doctors have already died. A new one comes, after one little week he’s finished,” the doctor said with visible pleasure. “Prussian doctors were invited, but our allies don’t find it to their liking.”
The next day Prince Andrei went to visit certain houses he had not been to yet, among them the house of the Rostovs, with whom he had renewed his acquaintance at the last ball. Besides the rules of courtesy, according to which he ought to call on the Rostovs, Prince Andrei wanted to see at home that special, animated girl who had left him with such a pleasant memory.
“Ah, I’m so afraid for her, so afraid!” said the countess, forgetting whom she was talking with. Her maternal intuition told her that there was too much of something in Natasha, and that because of it she would not be happy. Natasha had not yet finished singing when the enraptured fourteen-year-old Petya came running into the room with news that the mummers had come.
“The prince, on behalf of his pupil…son, is proposing to you. Do you or do you not want to be the wife of Prince Anatole Kuragin? Say yes or no!” he shouted, “and then I retain my right to give my opinion as well. Yes, my opinion and only my opinion,” added Prince Nikolai Andreich, turning to Prince Vassily and replying to his pleading expression. “Yes or no? Well?”
“Ah, Natasha!” Sonya said rapturously and seriously, without looking at her friend, as if she considered her unworthy of what she intended to say, and as if she was saying it to someone else, with whom it was impossible to joke. “I’ve fallen in love with your brother once and for all, and whatever happens to him, or to me, I  will never stop loving him—all my life.”
“Did you hear the passwords?” one officer of the guards said to another. “Two days ago they were ‘Napol&#233;on, France, bravoure,’  yesterday ‘Alexandre, Russie, grandeur’  one day our sovereign gives the passwords, the next day Napoleon. Tomorrow our sovereign will send a St. George to the bravest of the French guards. No way out of it! He has to respond in kind.”
“Yes, that’s right,” Prince Vassily went on impatiently, rubbing his bald head and angrily seizing the little table he had pushed away and moving it towards him again, “but, finally…finally, the thing is, as you know yourself, that last winter the count wrote a will according to which, passing over his direct heirs and us, he bequeathed all his property to Pierre.”
“It’s in the inlaid portfolio he keeps under his pillow. Now I know,” said the princess, not replying. “Yes, if I have a sin, a great sin, it’s my hatred of that loathsome woman,” the princess nearly shouted, changing into a competely different person. “And why is she worming her way in here? But I’ll have it out with her, I’ll have it all out. The time will come!”
On the twelfth of November, Kutuzov’s active army, camped near Olm&#252;tz, was preparing to be reviewed the next day by two emperors—Russian and Austrian. The guards, just arrived from Russia, were spending the night some ten miles from Olm&#252;tz, and the next day would come straight to the review, entering the field at Olm&#252;tz by ten o’clock in the morning.
“What can he write? Fal-di-diddle-da and the like, all only with the purpose of gaining time. I tell you, he’s in our hands, that’s certain. But the most amusing thing,” he said, suddenly laughing good-naturedly, “is that we simply couldn’t decide how to address the reply! If not as consul, and naturally not as emperor, then as General Buonaparte, it seemed to me.”
It was one of those March nights when it is as if winter wants to claim its own back and with desperate malice pours out its last snows and storms. The German doctor from Moscow was expected any moment, a carriage had been sent for him to the turning from the highway to the country road, and mounted men with lanterns went to lead him along the bumpy and muddy road.
“And what would you have liked?” Marya Dmitrievna shouted, getting angry again. “You weren’t locked up, were you? Who prevented him from coming to the house? Why carry you off like some Gypsy woman?…So he’d carry you off, and then what, do you think they wouldn’t find him? Your father, or your brother, or your fianc&#233;? He’s a scoundrel, a villain, that’s what!”
Each man lives for himself, uses his freedom to achieve his personal goals, and feels with his whole being that right now he can or cannot do such-and-such an action; but as soon as he does it, this action, committed at a certain moment in time, becomes irreversible and makes itself the property of history, in which it has not a free but a predestined significance.
Pierre did not have the practical tenacity that would have given him the possibility of undertaking the business directly, and therefore he did not like it, and only tried to pretend to the steward that he was occupied with it. And the steward tried to pretend to the count that he considered this occupation quite useful for the master and inconvenient for himself.
All Moscow society, from old women to children, received Pierre like a long-awaited guest, whose place was always kept ready and vacant. For Moscow society, Pierre was the most dear, kind, intelligent, merry, and magnanimous of eccentrics, absentminded and warm-hearted, a Russian squire of the old stamp. His purse was always empty, because it was open to everyone.
It was a gay, brilliant f&#234;te; connoisseurs said that rarely had so many beauties gathered in one place. Countess Bezukhov, among other Russian ladies who had followed the sovereign from Petersburg to Vilno, was at this ball, eclipsing the refined Polish ladies by her heavy, so-called Russian beauty. She was noticed, and the sovereign favored her with a dance.
When Natasha’s turn came again, she got up and, stepping quickly in her beribboned little shoes, she timidly ran alone across the room to the corner where Denisov was sitting. She saw that everyone was looking at her and waiting. Nikolai saw that Denisov and Natasha were having a smiling argument, and that Denisov was protesting but smiling joyfully. He ran over.
“I don’t know, I can’t say, my lad. Just think, I’ve got three hospitals to myself, four hundred and some patients! It’s a good thing some Prussian charitable ladies send us two pounds of coffee and lint24 a month, otherwise we’d have perished.” He laughed. “Four hundred, my lad, and they keep sending new ones. It is four hundred? Eh?” he turned to the assistant.
“What’s there to look at?” said the assistant. But precisely because the assistant obviously did not want to let him go in, Rostov entered the soldiers’ wards. Here the stench, which he had managed to get used to in the corridor, was still stronger. The stench here was slightly different: it was sharper, and one could sense that it was coming precisely from here.
That evening there was a reception at Countess Elena Vassilievna’s, there was the French ambassador, there was a prince who had lately become a frequent visitor to the countess’s house, and there were many brilliant ladies and gentlemen. Pierre came downstairs, strolled through the rooms, and struck all the guests by his concentratedly distracted and gloomy look.
“You know,” said Natasha in a whisper, moving closer to Nikolai and Sonya, when Dimmler had finished and still sat there, lightly thrumming the strings, clearly undecided whether to stop or begin something new, “I think that when you remember, remember, remember everything like that, you could go on until you remember what was there before you were in the world.”
First she heard only M&#233;tivier’s voice, then her father’s voice; then both voices began speaking at once, the door was thrown open, and on the threshold appeared the frightened, handsome figure of M&#233;tivier with his black forelock and the figure of the prince in his nightcap and robe, his face distorted by rage and the pupils of his eyes rolled downwards.
When the reading of Denisov’s venomous papers, which lasted more than an hour, was over, Rostov said nothing and spent the rest of the day in a very sad state of mind, in the company of Denisov’s hospital friends, who again gathered around him. He told them things he knew and listened to what others had to say. Denisov was gloomily silent throughout the evening.
“I am now fully settled in the new apartment, Count,” Berg informed him, obviously knowing that it could not be unpleasant to hear it, “and therefore would like to arrange a small soir&#233;e for my and my wife’s acquaintances.” (He smiled still more pleasantly.) “I wanted to ask the countess and you to do me the honor of joining us for a cup of tea and…supper.”
“And who’s this one?” she said, addressing her governess and looking into the face of her daughter, who was dressed as a Kazan Tartar. “Seems to be one of the Rostovs. Well, and you, Mister Hussar, which regiment do you serve in?” she asked Natasha. “That Turk, give that Turk some fruit jelly,” she said to the butler with a tray, “their law doesn’t prohibit it.”
Since the day his wife arrived in Moscow, Pierre had been intending to go somewhere, only so as not to be there with her. Soon after the Rostovs’ arrival in Moscow, the impression Natasha made on him forced him to hasten to carry out his intention. He went to Tver, to see the widow of Iosif Alexeevich, who had long ago promised to give him the deceased’s papers.
Natasha, pale, stern, was sitting next to Marya Dmitrievna, and her feverishly glittering, questioning gaze met Pierre just at the door. She did not smile, did not nod to him, she only looked at him fixedly, and her gaze asked him only this: was he a friend, or, like everybody else, an enemy in relation to Anatole? Pierre himself evidently did not exist for her.
Boris Drubetskoy, en gar&#231;on  (playing the bachelor), as he put it, having left his wife in Moscow, was also at this ball, and, though not an adjutant general, contributed a large sum to the subscription for the ball. Boris was now a rich man, far advanced in honors, no longer seeking patronage, but standing on an equal footing with the highest of his peers.
The stately figure of Nesvitsky, accompanied by the Cossack, and the resoluteness of Denisov, waving his saber and shouting desperately, had such an effect that they pushed through to the other end of the bridge and stopped the infantry. At the exit Nesvitsky found the colonel to whom he was to give the order, and, having fulfilled his mission, rode back again.
“I am unable to tell Your Majesty at what time the battle at the front began, but in D&#252;renstein, where I was, the troops went into attack between five and six o’clock in the evening,” said Bolkonsky, livening up and supposing on this occasion that he would be able to present the truthful description already prepared in his head of all he knew and had seen.
Riding among the same companies that had been eating kasha and drinking vodka a quarter of an hour ago, he saw everywhere the same quick movements of soldiers lining up and taking their muskets, and on all faces he recognized the feeling of animation that was in his heart. “It’s begun! Here it is! Fearful and merry!” spoke the face of every soldier and officer.
The conversation ended with the count, who wished to be magnanimous and not be subjected to new requests, saying he would give him a promissory note for eighty thousand. Berg smiled meekly, kissed the count on the shoulder, and said that he was very grateful, but that he was quite unable to settle into the new life now without receiving thirty thousand in cash.
“The other day, when he came out of church in full regalia, Mikhail Sidorych…” Semyon did not finish, hearing in the still air the clear music of no more than two or three hounds baying in pursuit. Inclining his head, he listened and frowned silently to his master. “They’ve struck on the litter…” he whispered, “they’re heading straight for the Lyadovsky knoll.”
The prince’s house was not what was known as “society,” but it was a small circle which, though not much talked about in town, it was very flattering to be received in. Boris had understood that a week ago, when, in his presence, Rastopchin had said to the commander in chief, in response to his invitation to dinner on St. Nicholas’s day, that he could not come:
“I don’t need anybody, I don’t love anybody but him. How dare you say he’s ignoble? Don’t you know that I love him?” cried Natasha. “Go away, Sonya, I don’t want to quarrel with you, go away, for God’s sake, go away: you see how tormented I am,” Natasha cried angrily in a restrainedly irritated and desperate voice. Sonya burst into sobs and ran out of the room.
“It won’t do, Princess, it won’t do,” he said, when the princess, having taken and closed the notebook with the next day’s lesson, was getting ready to leave. “Mathematics is a great thing, my lady. And I don’t want you to be like our stupid women here. Much patience, much pleasure.” He patted her on the cheek. “It will knock the foolishness out of your head.”
Despite all the force of the weary and assured tone in which these words were uttered, Pierre, who had been thinking for so long about his career, was about to object. But Prince Vassily interrupted him in that cooing, bass-voiced tone which precluded the possibility of interrupting his speech and which he made use of in cases requiring extreme persuasiveness.
Dolokhov, silent, his eyes closed, lay in the sleigh and did not answer a word to the questions they put to him; but as they entered Moscow, he suddenly came to and, raising his head with difficulty, took the hand of Rostov, who was sitting next to him. Rostov was struck by the totally altered, unexpectedly and rapturously tender expression on Dolokhov’s face.
Pelageya Danilovna Melyukov, a broad, energetic woman in spectacles and an open housecoat, was sitting in the drawing room, surrounded by her daughters, whom she was trying to keep from being bored. They were quietly pouring wax and looking at the shadows of the figures that emerged,10 when the footsteps and voices of the visitors were heard in the front hall.
Princess Marya looked at him with astonishment. She did not understand how it was even possible to ask about it. Pierre went into the study. Prince Andrei, quite changed, grown visibly healthier, but with a new crosswise wrinkle between his brows, in civilian dress, stood facing his father and Prince Meshchersky, arguing heatedly and making energetic gestures.
In an abandoned tavern, before which stood the doctor’s little kibitka, there were already some five officers. Marya Genrikhovna, a plump, flaxen-haired German, in a bed-jacket and nightcap, sat in the front corner on a wide bench. Her husband, the doctor, was asleep behind her. Rostov and Ilyin, greeted with merry exclamations and guffaws, came into the room.
Rostov, with his keen hunter’s eye, was one of the first to see these blue French dragoons pursuing our uhlans. Closer and closer came the disorderly crowds of uhlans and the French dragoons pursuing them. It was already possible to see how these men, who looked small at the foot of the hill, clashed together, chased each other, and waved their arms or sabers.
Rostov looked out the window and saw Denisov coming home. Denisov was a small man with a red face, shining black eyes, and disheveled black mustaches and hair. He was wearing an unbuttoned dolman, wide pleated trousers ballooning over his boots, and a crumpled hussar cap perched on the back of his head. He was approaching the porch gloomily, his head hanging.
The girl smiled and took it. Like everyone else on the bridge, Nesvitsky never took his eyes off the women until they had passed. Once they had passed, there again came the same soldiers, with the same talk, and finally everybody stopped. As often happens, the horses pulling the company cart balked at the exit from the bridge, and the whole crowd had to wait.
On returning home, Pierre could not fall asleep for a long time, thinking about what had happened to him. And what had happened to him? Nothing. He had simply realized that a woman he had known as a child, of whom he used to say distractedly, “Yes, good-looking,” when told that H&#233;l&#232;ne was a beauty—he had realized that this woman could belong to him.
The French had attacked the battery and, seeing Kutuzov, were shooting at him. With this volley, the regimental commander seized his leg; several soldiers fell, and an ensign holding a standard let it drop from his hands; the standard wavered and fell, stopped momentarily by the bayonets of the soldiers around it. The soldiers began firing without any orders.
“I have mentioned it, my dear sir, not out of curiosity, but for more important reasons.” He paused, not letting Pierre out of his gaze, and shifted on the sofa, inviting Pierre by this gesture to sit next to him. Pierre found it unpleasant to get into conversation with this old man, but, involuntarily submitting to him, he went over and sat down next to him.
Platov’s detachment acted independently of the army. Several times parts of the Pavlogradsky regiment participated in exchanges of fire with the enemy, took prisoners, and once even captured the carriages of Marshal Oudinot. In the month of April, the regiment camped for several weeks near a totally devastated, empty German village, not budging from the spot.
“Boris doesn’t want to help me, and I don’t want to turn to him. That’s settled,” thought Nikolai, “it’s all over between us, but I won’t leave here without doing all I can for Denisov and, above all, without delivering the letter to the sovereign. To the sovereign?! He’s here!” thought Rostov, involuntarily coming up again to the house occupied by Alexander.
“Have you seen yet” or “have you made the acquaintance of ma tante? ”†26 Anna Pavlovna said to the arriving guests, and led them quite seriously to a little old lady in high ribbons, who had come sailing out of the next room as soon as the guests began to arrive, called them by name, slowly shifting her gaze from the guest to ma tante,  and then walked away.
All the girls and even the ladies, except for the oldest ones, rose. Marya Dmitrievna stood in the doorway and, from the height of her corpulent body, her fifty-year-old head with its gray curled hair held high, looked over the guests, and unhurriedly straightened the wide sleeves of her dress, as if pushing them up. Marya Dmitrievna always spoke in Russian.
“Lads!” cried Miloradovich in a loud, self-assured, and merry voice, obviously so excited by the sounds of gunfire, the anticipation of battle, and the sight of his gallant Apsherontsy—his companions from Suvorov’s time—marching briskly past the emperors, that he forgot the sovereign’s presence. “Lads, it won’t be the first village you’ve taken!” he shouted.
Never had the amorous air in the Rostovs’ house, the atmosphere of being in love, manifested itself so strongly as during these festive days. “Seize the moments of happiness, make them love you, fall in love yourself! That is the only real thing in this world—the rest is all nonsense. And that is the one thing we’re taken up with here,” said this atmosphere.
“You sleep, I can’t,” the first voice answered, coming close to the window. She evidently leaned all the way out of the window, because he could hear the rustle of her dress and even her breathing. Everything became hushed and stone-still, like the moon and its light and shadows. Prince Andrei was also afraid to stir, lest he betray his involuntary presence.
Speransky told Kochubey that he was sorry he could not come earlier, but he had been detained in the palace. He did not say he had been detained by the sovereign. And this affectation of modesty Prince Andrei noticed. When Kochubey named Prince Andrei for him, Speransky slowly transferred his eyes to him with the same smile and silently began to look at him.
He paced silently from one corner of the room to the other, and again stopped in front of Balashov. His face was as if petrified in its stern expression, and his left leg trembled still more rapidly than before. Napoleon knew that he had this trembling of the left calf. “La vibration de mon mollet gauche est un grand signe chez moi,” *406 he would say later.
Anna Pavlovna smiled and promised to occupy herself with Pierre, who she knew was related to Prince Vassily through his father. The elderly lady who had so far been sitting with ma tante  hastily got up and overtook Prince Vassily in the front hall. All the former sham interest disappeared from her face. Her kind, weepy face expressed only anxiety and fear.
“Ah, what a misfortune! You say it was a decisive action? Mortier wasn’t taken, however.” (He reflected.) “I’m very glad you’ve come with good news, though Schmidt’s death is a high price for a victory. His Majesty will certainly wish to see you, but not today. Thank you, get some rest. Be at the levee tomorrow after the parade. I’ll let you know, however.”
The next day Prince Andrei remembered yesterday’s ball, but his thought did not dwell on it for long. “Yes, it was a very brilliant ball. And then, too…yes, Miss Rostov is very sweet. There’s something fresh in her, something special, non-Petersburg, that makes her different.” That was all he thought about the ball, and, having had tea, he sat down to work.
“Mais, ma pauvre Catiche, c’est clair comme le jour .*121 He alone is then the legitimate heir to everything, and you won’t get even this much. You must know, my dear, whether the will and the letter were written, and whether they have been destroyed. And if they’ve been overlooked for some reason, you must know where they are and must find them, because…”
“Look, Prince,” said another, who very much wanted to take one more little pie, but was embarrassed, and who therefore pretended to be surveying the area, “look, our infantrymen have already gotten in there. Over there in the little meadow beyond the village, three of them are dragging something. They’ll ransack that castle,” he said with obvious approval.
Since early morning, though it was forbidden to go near the line, the officers had been unable to ward off the curious. The soldiers stationed on the line, like people displaying something rare, no longer looked at the French, but made their observations to those who came and, languishing, waited to be relieved. Prince Andrei stopped to examine the French.
The uncle led his guests through the front hall into a small reception room with a folding table and red chairs, then to a drawing room with a round birch table and a sofa, then to the study, with a torn sofa, a worn rug, and portraits of Suvorov, the host’s father and mother, and himself in military uniform. The study smelled strongly of tobacco and dogs.
As the mother and son reached the middle of the room, intending to ask their way from an old servant who had jumped up when they came in, the bronze handle of one of the doors turned, and Prince Vassily, in an informal velvet house jacket, with one star, came out, accompanying a handsome dark-haired man. This man was the famous Petersburg doctor, Lorrain.
Prince Andrei, who, to complete the trophy of prisoners, was also brought out before the eyes of the emperor, could not fail to attract his attention. Napoleon evidently remembered seeing him on the battlefield, and, turning to him, used the same appellation of young man, jeune homme,  under which Bolkonsky had been imprinted on his memory the first time.
As over a plush carpet, the horses walked over the field, splashing in puddles now and then as they crossed the roads. The misty sky went on imperceptibly and evenly descending to earth; the air was still, warm, soundless. Now and then came the whistle of a hunter, the snort of a horse, the crack of a whip, or the squeal of a hound strayed from its place.
Princess Marya begged her brother to wait one more day; she said she knew how unhappy their father would be if Andrei left without making peace with him; but Prince Andrei replied that he would probably come back soon from the army, that he would be sure to write to their father, and that the longer he stayed now, the more aggravated the discord would be.
She evidently forgot her age and employed, out of habit, all her old feminine resources. But as soon as he left, her face again acquired the same cold, sham expression it had had before. She went back to the circle, where the viscount was going on with his story, and again pretended to listen, waiting for the moment to leave, since her business was done.
Prince Andrei had been living in the country for two years without a break. All those undertakings which Pierre had initiated on his estates and had not brought to any result, constantly changing from one thing to another—all these undertakings, without talking about them to anyone and without any noticeable effort, had been carried out by Prince Andrei.
“I don’t understand,” Ilagin went on, “how it is that other hunters can be jealous over game and dogs. I’ll tell you about myself, Count. I enjoy having a ride, you know; you get together with company like this…what could be better?” (He again took his beaver cap off to Natasha.) “But this counting skins, who brought in how many—it’s all the same to me!”
He sometimes comforted himself with the thought that he happened to be leading this life just so, in the meantime; but then he would be horrified by another thought, that it was just so, in the meantime, that so many people had entered this life, this club, as he had, with all their teeth and hair, and come out of it with not a single tooth or hair left.
“But I precisely wish to tell you, so as to avoid misunderstandings, that you are greatly mistaken if you count my mother and me among those people. We’re very poor, but I can speak for myself at least: precisely because your father is rich, I don’t consider myself his relation, and neither I nor my mother will ever ask for or accept anything from him.”
“That’s all we need!” the princess interrupted, smiling sardonically and without changing the expression of her eyes. “I’m a woman; in your opinion, we’re all stupid; but I know enough to be sure that an illegitimate son cannot inherit…Un b&#226;tard, ” she added, supposing that this translation would definitively prove to the prince his groundlessness.
The hospital was in a little Prussian village twice ravaged by Russian and French troops. Precisely because it was summer, when it was so pleasant in the fields, this little village, with its broken roofs and fences and its littered streets, with ragged inhabitants and drunken or sick soldiers wandering about in it, presented an especially dismal sight.
Prince Andrei replied. After that question, other equally simple questions followed: “Was Kutuzov in good health? How long ago had he left Krems?” and so on. The emperor spoke with such an expression as if his whole goal consisted in asking a certain number of questions. The replies to these questions, as was only too clear, were of no interest to him.
The countess, learning at once through the maids of what had happened in the wing, was, on the one hand, calmed by the reflection that their situation should now be set to rights, but, on the other hand, was troubled by the thought of how her son would put up with it. She tiptoed to his door several times, listening as he smoked one pipe after another.
“&#201;coutez, ch&#232;re Annette,”  said the prince, suddenly taking his interlocutor by the hand and pulling it down for some reason. “Arrangez-moi cette affaire et je suis votre  faithful slave &#224; tout jamais  (slafe—comme mon  village headman &#233;crit des  reports: f  instead of v ).**23 She’s from a good family and rich. That’s all I need.”
M’sieur Pierre did not know whom to answer, looked around at them all, and smiled. His smile was not like that of other people, blending into a non-smile. With him, on the contrary, when a smile came, his serious and even somewhat sullen face vanished suddenly, instantly, and another appeared—childish, kind, even slightly stupid, and as if apologetic.
“Well, Captain Tushin, aren’t you ashamed?” the staff officer went on. “It would seem that you, as an artillerist, ought to set an example, and here you are bootless. They’ll sound the alarm, and a fine one you’ll be with no boots on.” (The staff officer smiled.) “Kindly go back to your posts, gentlemen—all, all of you,” he added in a superior’s tone.
It was long since Rostov had experienced such enjoyment from music as on that day. But as soon as Natasha finished her barcarolle,  reality again reminded him of itself. Saying nothing, he left and went downstairs to his room. A quarter of an hour later, the old count, merry and content, came home from the club. Nikolai, hearing him come, went to him.
In other conversations she praised Julie and advised Nikolai to go to Moscow for the holidays to amuse himself. Nikolai guessed what his mother’s conversations were driving at, and during one of these conversations he got her to speak quite openly. She told him that all her hope for straightening out their affairs now lay in his marrying Miss Karagin.
“The squadron can’t pass,” shouted Vaska Denisov, angrily baring his white teeth, spurring his handsome raven-black Bedouin, who, twitching his ears from running into bayonets, snorting, spraying foam around him from his bit, jingling, stamped his hooves on the planks of the bridge and seemed ready to jump over the railing if his rider would let him.
“Tomorrow we’re off, I’m giving you a place in my carriage. I’m very glad. We’ve finished everything that matters here. I should have left long ago. I have received this from the chancellor. I solicited him on your behalf, and you’ve been enrolled in the diplomatic corps and made a gentleman of the bedchamber. Now the diplomatic path is open to you.”
“Whatever happens to you,” he said, “you must courageously endure everything, if you are firmly resolved to enter our brotherhood.” (Pierre responded affirmatively by inclining his head.) “When you hear knocking on the door, you will unbind your eyes,” added Willarski. “I wish you courage and success.” And, pressing Pierre’s hand, Willarski went out.
“Why, as if he’s going to hunt out from under our hounds! It was my mouse-gray bitch that caught it. Go on, take it to court! He grabs hold of the fox! I whacked him with it. You want it, it’s strapped on here. And how would you like a bit of this?” said the hunter, pointing to his dagger and probably imagining that he was still talking to his enemy.
“You’ll never understand it,” she said, turning to Vera, “because you’ve never loved anybody, you have no heart, you’re just a Madame de Genlis” (this nickname, considered very offensive, had been given to Vera by Nikolai), “and your highest pleasure is to do unpleasant things to others. Go and flirt with Berg as much as you like,” she said quickly.
“God knows, ch&#232;re amie!  These rich courtiers are such egoists. But even so I’ll go to him now with Boris and tell him outright what it’s about. Let them think whatever they like of me, it really makes no difference to me, when my son’s destiny depends on it.” The princess got up. “It’s now two o’clock, and you dine at four. I have time to go.”
“Ah, don’t speak to me! Last winter she wormed her way in here and told the count a whole heap of such vile, such nasty things about us all, especially Sophie—I can’t repeat it—that the count became ill and didn’t want to see us for two weeks. I know it was then that he wrote that nasty, loathsome document; but I thought the document meant nothing.”
“All right,” said Dolokhov, having finished reckoning, “all right! I’ll go twenty-one roubles,” he said, pointing to the difference of twenty-one roubles over the exact sum of forty-three thousand, and, taking the deck, prepared to deal. Rostov obediently unbent the corner and, instead of the six thousand he had prepared, carefully wrote twenty-one.
Having come on Tuesday evening to H&#233;l&#232;ne’s magnificent salon, Boris was not given a clear explanation of why it had been necessary for him to come. There were other guests, the countess spoke little to him, and only as he kissed her hand on taking his leave did she, with a strange absence of a smile, unexpectedly, in a whisper, say to him:
Prince Andrei did not reply. The carriage and horses had long been led out on the other side and hitched up, and the sun had already half disappeared, and the evening frost had covered the pools by the crossing with stars, but Pierre and Andrei, to the astonishment of the lackeys, coachmen, and ferrymen, were still standing on the ferry and talking.
The sovereign said a few words to him and took a step towards his horse. Again the crowd of the suite and the crowd of the street, in which Rostov stood, moved towards the sovereign. Stopping by his horse and placing his hand on the saddle, the sovereign turned to the cavalry general and spoke in a loud voice, obviously wishing everyone to hear him.
“I want peace no less than the emperor Alexander,” he began. “Have I not been doing everything during these eighteen months to obtain it? I have waited eighteen months for explanations. And what is demanded of me, in order to start negotiations?” he said, frowning and making an energetically questioning gesture with his small, white, and plump hand.
He spoke that refined French in which our grandparents not only spoke but thought, and with those quiet, patronizing intonations which are proper to a significant man who has grown old in society and at court. He went over to Anna Pavlovna, kissed her hand, presenting her with his perfumed and shining bald pate, and settled comfortably on the sofa.
Another voice, that of a not very tall man with clear blue eyes, especially striking amidst all these drunken voices by its sober expression, shouted from the window: “Come here—break the grip!” This was Dolokhov, an officer of the Semyonovsky regiment, a notorious gambler and duellist, who lived with Anatole. Pierre smiled, looking around merrily.
“We’re not on the Tsaritsyn Field,9 Mikhail Larionovich, where you don’t start a parade until all the regiments are assembled,” said the sovereign, again glancing into the eyes of the emperor Franz, as though inviting him, if not to take part, at least to listen to what he was saying; but the emperor Franz went on looking around and did not listen.
“Go and wake him up, Sonya,” said Natasha. “Tell him I’m calling him to sing.” She went on sitting, thinking about what it meant that it had all happened before, and, not resolving the question and not regretting it in the least, was again carried back in her imagination to the time when she was with him and he was looking at her with amorous eyes.
The fog began to lift, and enemy troops could be dimly seen about a mile and a half away on the heights opposite. To the left below, the gunfire was growing louder. Kutuzov stopped, talking with an Austrian general. Prince Andrei, standing slightly behind him, peered at the enemy and turned to an adjutant, wishing to borrow a field glass from him.
“Countess, I am to blame before you,” Denisov went on in a halting voice. “But know that I adore your daughter and your whole family so much that I would give two lives…” He looked at the countess and, noticing her stern face…“Good-bye, Countess,” he said, kissed her hand, and, without looking at Natasha, with quick, resolute steps, left the room.
“Mama, I want him.  Why am I going to waste like this, mama?…” Her voice broke off, tears flowed from her eyes, and to conceal them she quickly turned and left the room. She went to the sitting room, stood, thought, and went to the maids’ quarters. There an old maidservant was grumbling at a young girl who came in breathless from the cold outside.
“Sonya! When will he come back? When will I see him? My God, how I fear for him and for myself, and I’m frightened about everything…” Natasha said, and, without a word of reply to Sonya’s consolations, she went to bed and, long after the candle was put out, lay motionless, open-eyed, on her bed, looking at the frosty moonlight through the windows.
“Connaissez-vous le proverbe:  ‘Jerome, Jerome, stay close to home, keep your shovel in the loam’?” asked Shinshin, wincing and smiling. “Cela nous convient &#224; merveille.  Take Suvorov35—even he got beaten &#224; plate couture,  and where are our Suvorovs now? Je vous demande un peu,” †114 he said, constantly switching from Russian to French.
“‘Vienne trouve les bases du trait&#233; propos&#233; tellement hors d’atteinte, qu’on ne saurait y parvenir m&#234;me par une continuit&#233; de succ&#232;s les plus brillants, et elle met en doute les moyens qui pourraient nous les procurer.’ C’est la phrase authentique du cabinet de Vienne,” *29810 the Danish charg&#233; d’affaires was saying.
“Ah, well, how about that! I got everything confused. There are so many relations in Moscow! You’re Boris…yes. So we’ve finally straightened it out. Well, what do you think of the Boulogne expedition? Won’t the English be in trouble if Napoleon crosses the channel? I think the expedition is very important. If only Villeneuve doesn’t botch it!”31
“Go to hell,” said Anatole, and seizing himself by the hair, he went to the next room, came back at once, and sat with his legs tucked under in an armchair in front of Dolokhov. “Devil knows what it is! Eh? Feel how it’s pounding!” He took Dolokhov’s hand and put it to his heart. “Ah! quel pied, mon cher, quel regard! Une d&#233;esse!! *385 Eh?”
Balashov rode on, supposing from Murat’s words that he would quite soon be introduced to Napoleon himself. But instead of meeting Napoleon soon, he was detained by sentinels of Davout’s infantry corps at the next village, as he had been at the front line, and the summoned adjutant of the corps commander took him to the village to Marshal Davout.
The aunt received the two young people in her corner, but, it seemed, wished to hide her adoration of H&#233;l&#232;ne and rather wished to show her fear before Anna Pavlovna. She glanced at her niece as if asking what she was to do with these people. As she was leaving them, Anna Pavlovna again touched Pierre’s sleeve with her finger and said:
On the day after the meeting of Boris and Rostov, there was a review of the Russian and Austrian troops, the fresh ones come from Russia, as well as those returned from campaigning with Kutuzov. Both emperors, the Russian with his heir the grand duke, and the Austrian with the archduke, made this review of the combined eighty-thousand-man army.
“Quant &#224; celui, Sire,”  Paulucci went on desperately, as if unable to restrain himself, “qui &#224; conseill&#233; le camp de Drissa, je ne vois pas d’autre alternative que la maison jaune ou le gibet.” *421 Not hearing out and as if not listening to the Italian’s words, the sovereign, having recognized Bolkonsky, graciously addressed him:
“How are you going to find such balance?” Pierre began; but just then Anna Pavlovna came over and, with a stern glance at Pierre, asked the Italian how he was taking the local climate. The Italian’s face suddenly changed and acquired an insultingly false sweetness of expression, which was probably habitual with him in conversations with women.
“Against your will He will save you and have mercy on you and turn you to Him, because in Him alone there is truth and peace,” she said in a voice trembling from emotion, with a solemn gesture holding up in both hands before her brother an old oval icon of the Savior with a blackened face, in a silver setting, on a finely wrought silver chain.
The Pavlogradsky regiment, belonging to that part of the army that had been in the 1805 campaign, had been replenishing its ranks in Russia and was late for the first actions of the campaign. It had not been at Pultusk nor at Preussisch-Eylau, and, joining the active army in the second half of the campaign, was included in Platov’s detachment.
Despite the fact that in Moscow the Rostovs belonged to high society without knowing or thinking what society they belonged to, in Petersburg their society was mixed and indefinite. In Petersburg they were provincials to whom the very people that the Rostovs fed in Moscow without asking what society they belonged to would not lower themselves.
The little princess either did not hear or did not want to hear his words. She was silent and seemed embarrassed. The prince asked about her father, and the princess began to speak and smiled. He asked her about mutual acquaintances: the princess became still more animated and started talking away, giving the prince greetings and town gossip.
“What did they stop for? There’s no order!” said the soldiers. “What’s this shoving ahead? Devil take it! There’s such a thing as waiting. It’ll be worse if he  sets fire to the bridge. See, even the officer got shoved aside,” the halted crowds were saying on different sides, looking at each other, and still pressing forward towards the exit.
On entering the village, he got off his horse and went to the first house, intending to rest for at least a moment, eat something, and bring clarity to all these insulting, tormenting thoughts. “These are not troops, they’re a mob of ruffians,” he was thinking as he went to the window of the first house, when a familiar voice called his name.
“Or are you afraid to play with me?” Dolokhov said now, as if guessing Rostov’s thought, and he smiled. Behind his smile, Rostov saw in him that mood he had been in during the dinner at the club and generally at those times when, bored with everyday life, Dolokhov felt the necessity of getting out of it by some strange, most often cruel, act.
“About life, about man’s purpose. It can’t be. I thought the same, and do you know what saved me? Masonry. No, don’t smile. Masonry is not a religious, not a ritual sect, as I also thought, Masonry is the best, the only expression of the best, the eternal sides of mankind.” And he began to explain Masonry to Prince Andrei as he understood it.
But the countess did not consent to let the count go: he had had a pain in his leg all those days. It was decided that Ilya Andreich should not go, but that if Louisa Ivanovna (Mme Schoss) went, then the young ladies could go to Mrs. Melyukov’s. Sonya, always timid and shy, was the most insistent in begging Louisa Ivanovna not to refuse them.
“Aucun,”  the viscount retorted. “After the duke’s murder, even the most partial people ceased to see a hero in him. Si m&#234;me &#231;a a &#233;t&#233; un h&#233;ros pour certains gens, ” the viscount said, turning to Anna Pavlovna, “depuis l’assassinat du duc il y a un martyr de plus dans le ciel, un h&#233;ros de moins sur la terre.” ‡56
This gesture was so unlike the princess’s usual calm, the fear that showed on Prince Vassily’s face was so inconsistent with his augustness, that Pierre stopped and looked at his guide questioningly through his spectacles. Anna Mikhailovna expressed no surprise, she only smiled slightly and sighed, as if to show that she had expected it all.
To the left below, in the fog, exchanges of fire between unseen troops could be heard. There, it seemed to Prince Andrei, the battle would concentrate, there an obstacle would be encountered, and “it’s there that I’ll be sent with a brigade or division, and there, with a standard in my hand, I’ll go forward and crush everything ahead of me.”
“Yes. It’s past nine,” Natasha’s voice replied, and in the next room the rustle of starched skirts, whispers, and the laughter of girls’ voices were heard, and through the slightly open door flashed something light blue, ribbons, dark hair, and merry faces. This was Natasha, with Sonya and Petya, who had come to see whether he had gotten up.
Natasha did not remember how she entered the drawing room. Going through the door and seeing him, she stopped. “Can it be that this stranger has now become everything  for me?” she asked herself, and instantly answered: “Yes, everything. He alone is now dearer to me than anything in the world.” Prince Andrei went up to her with lowered eyes.
“But one way or another,” thought Sonya, standing in the dark corridor, “now or never, the time has come to prove that I remember the family’s kindness to me and that I love Nicolas. No, even if I don’t sleep for three nights, I won’t leave this corridor, and I’ll keep her back by force and not let shame fall upon their family,” she thought.
Prince Andrei went out to the front hall and, offering his shoulders to the footman, who was putting his cloak on him, listened indifferently to his wife’s chatter with Prince Ippolit, who also came out to the front hall. Prince Ippolit stood beside the pretty, pregnant princess and looked at her directly and intently through his lorgnette.
“It’s terrible! terrible!” she was saying. “But whatever it costs me, I will fulfill my duty. I will come to spend the night. He can’t be left like that. Every minute is precious. I don’t understand why the princesses keep delaying. Maybe God will help me find the means to prepare him…Adieu, mon prince, que le bon Dieu vous soutienne… ”*107
All the while he was in the battery by the cannon, as often happens, he had never stopped hearing the sounds of the officers’ voices, talking in the lean-to, but had not understood a single word of what they were saying. Suddenly the sound of voices from the lean-to struck him with such soul-felt tones that he involuntarily began to listen.
“Ah, how vexing!” said Dolgorukov, hurriedly getting up and shaking hands with Prince Andrei and Boris. “You know, I’ll be very glad to do everything in my power both for you and for this nice young man.” He shook Boris’s hand once more with an expression of good-natured, sincere, and animated light-mindedness. “But you see—till next time!”
“&#192; celui qui s’est le plus vaillamment conduit dans cette derni&#232;re guerre,” †334 Napoleon added, rapping out every syllable with a calm and assurance that Rostov found outrageous, and looking over the ranks of Russian soldiers standing at attention before him, still presenting arms and looking fixedly at the face of their emperor.
“Votre Majest&#233; me permettra-t-elle de demander l’avis du colonel,” ‡335 said Alexander, and took a few hasty steps towards Prince Kozlovsky, the commander of the battalion. Bonaparte meanwhile began to remove the glove from his small white hand, tore it, and threw it down. An adjutant, hastily rushing forward from behind, picked it up.
Having finished doing her hair, Natasha, in a short petticoat, her ball slippers showing from under it, and wearing her mother’s bed jacket, ran up to Sonya, looked her over, and then ran to her mother. She turned her mother’s head, pinned on the toque, and, quickly kissing her gray hair, again ran to the maids who were taking up her skirt.
Sometimes, looking at the strange but funny steps the dancers made, having decided once and for all that, as they were dressed up, no one could recognize them, and therefore not feeling embarrassed—Pelageya Danilovna covered her face with her handkerchief, and her whole corpulent body shook with unrestrainable, kindly, old-woman’s laughter.
“Know one thing, Masha, I cannot, have not, and never will reproach my wife  for anything, nor can I reproach myself for anything in relation to her; and that will always be so, whatever circumstances I find myself in. But if you want to know the truth…if you want to know whether I’m happy? No. Is she happy? No. Why is that? I don’t know…”
Going into the house, Prince Andrei saw Nesvitsky and another adjutant having something to eat. They hastily turned to Bolkonsky with the question whether he had any fresh news. On their familiar faces Prince Andrei read the expression of alarm and anxiety. This expression was especially noticeable on the always laughing face of Nesvitsky.
Among the young men introduced by Rostov, one of the first was Dolokhov, whom everyone in the house liked with the exception of Natasha. She almost quarreled with her brother over Dolokhov. She insisted that he was a wicked man, that, in his duel with Bezukhov, Pierre had been right and Dolokhov wrong, that he was unpleasant and unnatural.
Even though Iogel did not acknowledge this mazurka as authentic, everyone admired Denisov’s skill, began choosing him constantly, and the old men, smiling, began to talk about Poland and the good old days. Denisov, flushed from the mazurka and wiping himself with a handkerchief, sat down by Natasha and did not leave her for the whole ball.
Bogucharovo lay in flat, unattractive country covered with fields and first- and second-growth stands of fir and birch. The manor stood at the end of a village that stretched along the high road, behind a newly dug, well-filled pond, its banks not yet overgrown with grass, in the middle of a young woods, amidst which stood a few big pines.
The guests stood in the ballroom, crowding by the door, waiting for the sovereign. The countess placed herself in the first rows of this crowd. Natasha heard and felt that several voices were asking about her and looking at her. She realized that she was liked by those who paid attention to her, and this observation reassured her somewhat.
Having finished his questioning and extorted from Danilo the admission that the dogs were all right (Danilo himself wanted to go), Nikolai ordered the horses saddled. But Danilo was just about to leave when Natasha, not yet dressed, her hair still undone, in her nanny’s big shawl, came into the room with quick steps. Petya ran in with her.
The island of the Otradnoe reserve could be seen about two hundred yards away, and the kennelmen were approaching it. Rostov, having come to a final decision with the uncle about where to set on the hounds, and pointing Natasha to a place where she could stand and where nothing could ever run out, he went to circle around above the ravine.
“Vraiment?” ‡365 said Princess Marya, looking into Pierre’s kind face and never ceasing to think about her grief. “It would be easier for me,” she thought, “if I decided to confide everything I feel to someone. And I’d like to tell it all precisely to Pierre. He’s so kind and noble. It would make it easier for me. He could give me advice!”
The French colonel had a hard time stifling his yawns, but was courteous, and evidently realized the full significance of Balashov. He led him past his soldiers behind the line and informed him that his wish to be presented to the emperor would probably be fulfilled at once, because, as far as he knew, the emperor’s quarters were close by.
Prince Vassily fell silent, and his cheeks began to twitch nervously now on one side, now on the other, giving his face an unpleasant expression which never appeared on Prince Vassily’s face when he was in a drawing room. His eyes were also not the same as usual: now they looked with insolent jocularity, now they glanced around fearfully.
“Well, and now good-bye!” He gave his son his hand to kiss and embraced him. “Remember one thing, Prince Andrei: if you’re killed, I, your old father, will be pained…” He unexpectedly fell silent and suddenly went on in a shrill voice: “But if I learn that you have not behaved like Nikolai Bolkonsky’s son, I will be ashamed!” he shrieked.
“God be with us!” Bagration said in a firm, audible voice, turned for a moment to the front line, and, swinging his arms slightly, with the awkward gait of a cavalryman, as if working at it, he went forward over the uneven field. Prince Andrei felt that some invincible force was drawing him forward, and he experienced great happiness.*223
When the review was over, the officers, both the newly arrived and Kutuzov’s, began to gather in groups, and talk sprang up about rewards, about the Austrians and their uniforms, about their front, about Bonaparte and how bad things were going to be for him now, especially when the corps from Essen also arrives and Prussia takes our side.
“And if you come to my place—right you are!—that will be even better,” said the uncle. “You see, it’s wet weather,” the uncle said, “you’d get some rest, the little countess would be taken in the droshky.” The uncle’s offer was accepted, a hunter was sent to Otradnoe for the droshky, and Nikolai went to the uncle’s with Natasha and Petya.
“I don’t even know what’s in this document,” said the princess, turning to Prince Vassily and pointing to the inlaid portfolio she was holding in her hands. “I only know that the real will is in his desk, and this is a forgotten document…” She tried to go around Anna Mikhailovna, but Anna Mikhailovna sprang over and again barred her way.
“No, but I have fallen in love and will fall in love a thousand times, though I have no such feeling of friendship, trust, and love for anyone but you. Besides, I’m young. Maman  doesn’t want it. Well, simply, I don’t promise anything. And I ask you to think about Dolokhov’s proposal,” he said, speaking his friend’s name with difficulty.
After his talk with his wife, Pierre went to Petersburg. At the Torzhok posting station there were no horses, or else the postmaster did not want to give them to him. Pierre had to wait. Without undressing, he lay down on a leather sofa in front of a round table, put his big feet in their warm boots on the table, and lapsed into thought.
Four years earlier, having met a German friend in the stalls of a Moscow theater, Berg had pointed Vera Rostov out to him and said in German: “Das soll mein Weib werden” *344 —and from that moment on had determined to marry her. Now, in Petersburg, having figured out the Rostovs’ situation, he decided that the time had come and proposed.
In the new, clean, bright study, decorated with little busts, and little pictures, and new furniture, sat Berg and his wife. Berg, in a brand new, buttoned-up uniform, sat beside his wife, explaining to her that one can and must have acquaintances among people above oneself, because only then can one find pleasure in one’s acquaintances.
Rostov threw the purse under the pillow and shook the small, moist hand that was held out to him. Telyanin had for some reason been transferred from the guards just before the campaign. He behaved very well in the regiment; but he was not liked, and Rostov especially could neither overcome nor conceal his causeless loathing for the man.
The reason for the confusion was that, while the Austrian cavalry was moving on the left flank, the superior officers decided that our center was too far from the right flank, and the entire cavalry was ordered to cross over to the right. Several thousand cavalry were advancing ahead of the infantry, and the infantry was forced to wait.
“He couldn’t do that. The people gave him power only so that he could deliver them from the Bourbons, and because the people saw a great man in him. The revolution was a great thing,” M’sieur Pierre went on, showing by this desperate and provocative parenthetical phrase his great youth and desire to speak everything out all the sooner.
When the officers drank up and smashed their glasses, Kirsten filled others, and, in nothing but his shirt and breeches, with the glass in his hand, went up to the soldiers’ campfires, struck a majestic pose, with his long gray mustache, his white chest showing through his unbuttoned shirt, stood in the firelight, and swung his arm up.
Kutuzov turned away without answering him, and his gaze chanced to rest on Prince Andrei, who was standing close by. Seeing Bolkonsky, Kutuzov softened the angry and caustic expression of his gaze, as if aware that his adjutant was not to blame for what was going on. And, without answering the Austrian adjutant, he addressed Bolkonsky:
The countess had written directly to Mrs. Karagin in Moscow, suggesting the marriage of her daughter to her son, and had received a favorable answer from her. Mrs. Karagin had replied that she, for her part, gave her consent, and that everything would depend on her daughter’s inclination. Mrs. Karagin invited Nikolai to come to Moscow.
“Here’s what,” said the old maid. “A girl once went, took a cock, set the table for two—all very proper—and sat down. She sat for a while, only suddenly she hears…harness bells, sleigh bells, a sleigh drives up; she hears him coming. He walks in, looking just like a man, like an officer, goes over, and sits down with her at the table.”
“Ch&#232;re  Anna Mikhailovna,” he said, with his usual tone of familiarity and boredom, “it is almost impossible for me to do what you want; but to prove to you how much I love you and honor the memory of your late father, I will do the impossible: your son will be transferred to the guards, here is my hand on it. Are you satisfied?”
Mitenka flew headlong down the six steps and ran off into the flower garden. (This flower garden was a well-known place of refuge for wrongdoers in Otradnoe. Mitenka himself, when coming back drunk from town, hid in this flower garden, and many inhabitants of Otradnoe, hiding from Mitenka, knew the saving power of this flower garden.)
The hunters took the fox from the dogs, and stood dismounted for a long time without strapping it on. The horses, their bridles free and their saddles jutting up, stood nearby, and the dogs lay down. The hunters waved their arms and did something with the fox. The sound of a horn rang out from there—the conventional signal of a fight.
Supposing that such a reception could be given him only because Davout did not know that he was the emperor Alexander’s adjutant general and even his representative before Napoleon, Balashov hastened to inform him of his rank and purpose. Contrary to his expectation, Davout, having heard Balashov out, became still more stern and rude.
At the end of Balashov’s speech, Napoleon again took out his snuffbox, snuffed from it, and gave a signal by stamping his foot twice on the floor. The door opened; a respectfully flexing gentleman-in-waiting handed the emperor his hat and gloves, another handed him a handkerchief. Napoleon, without looking at them, turned to Balashov.
“You will excuse me, my dear viscount,” Prince Vassily said to the Frenchman, gently pulling him down on his chair by the sleeve, so that he would not stand up. “This unfortunate f&#234;te at the ambassador’s deprives me of my pleasure and interrupts you. I’m very sorry to leave your delightful soir&#233;e,” he said to Anna Pavlovna.
Some smiled at Zherkov’s words, expecting a joke from him as usual; but, noticing that what he said also contributed to the glory of our arms and of that day, they assumed serious expressions, though many knew very well that what Zherkov had said was a lie, with no foundation at all. Prince Bagration turned to the little old colonel.
He was clearly so preoccupied that he even forgot to be respectful with the commander in chief: he interrupted him, spoke quickly, unclearly, not looking into his interlocutor’s eyes, not answering the questions put to him, was covered with mud, and looked pitiful, exhausted, disconcerted, and at the same time presumptuous and proud.
“I’m afraid,” said Pierre, smiling and hesitating between the trust which the Mason personally inspired in him and his habit of mocking Masonic beliefs, “I’m afraid I’m very far from understanding—how shall I put it—I’m afraid my way of thinking about the universe is so much the opposite of yours that we won’t understand each other.”
Lazarev sat in the place of honor; he was embraced, congratulated, his hands were shaken by Russian and French officers. Crowds of officers and people came merely to look at Lazarev. A droning of Russian and French talk and laughter hung over the tables on the square. Two officers with flushed faces, merry and happy, walked past him.
On that first evening which Bolkonsky spent with him, talking about the legislative commission, Speransky told Prince Andrei ironically that this commission had existed for a hundred and fifty years, had cost millions, and had done nothing, except that Rosenkampf had glued little labels to all the articles of comparative legislation.
I go to bed in a happy and calm mood. Great Lord, help me to walk in Thy ways: (1) to overcome the part of wrath by gentleness and slowness; (2) of lust by restraint and repulsion; (3) to withdraw from vanity, yet not lose the habit of (a) work in government service, (b) family cares, (c) friendly relations, and(d) economic concerns.
“Hard as this year that postpones my happiness will be for me,” Prince Andrei went on, “during this time you will test yourself. I ask you to make me happy in a year; but you’re free: our engagement will remain a secret, and if you become convinced that you don’t love me, or that you love…” Prince Andrei said with an unnatural smile.
Natasha did not want to go, but she could not reject Marya Dmitrievna’s kindness, which was meant exclusively for her. When she came out, dressed, to the reception room, and, looking in the big mirror while waiting for her father, saw that she was pretty, very pretty, she felt still more sad; but this was a sweet and amorous sadness.
And, probably becoming still more aroused because, in saying that, he had said an obvious untruth, and because Balashov, in the same pose of submission to his fate, stood silently before him, he turned around sharply, went up very close to Balashov’s face, and, making energetic and rapid gestures with his white hands, nearly shouted:
Anna Mikhailovna was already embracing her and weeping. The countess was also weeping. They wept because they were friends; and because they were kind; and because they, who had been friends since childhood, were concerned with such a mean subject—money; and because their youth was gone…But for both of them they were pleasant tears…
“No, gentlemen, no…don’t think…I understand very well, you’re wrong to think it of me…I…for me…for the honor of the regiment…well, so? I’ll show it by my deeds, and for me the honor of the flag…Well, anyhow, it’s true, I’m to blame!…” Tears welled up in his eyes. “I’m to blame, I’m to blame all around! Well, what more do you want?…”
“Very well, be so good as to wait,” he said to the general in Russian, with that French pronunciation which he used when he wanted to speak disdainfully, and, noticing Boris and no longer addressing the general (who pleadingly ran after him asking to be heard out), Prince Andrei turned to Boris with a cheerful smile, nodding to him.
“May I be so bold as to ask Your Excellency to move over a little for this gentleman?” asked the postmaster, coming into the room and bringing in another traveler who was detained for lack of horses. This was a squat, large-boned, sallow, wrinkled old man with gray, beetling brows over glittering eyes of an indefinite grayish color.
“Ah, that’s terrible, terrible!” said Pierre. “Only I don’t understand how one can live with such thoughts. Such moments have come over me, it was not long ago, in Moscow and on the road, but then I go so much to seed that I don’t live, I find everything vile, above all myself. I don’t eat then, don’t wash…well, how is it with you…”
“What nonsense sometimes comes into one’s head!” thought Prince Andrei. “But the one sure thing is that this girl is so sweet, so special, that she won’t spend a month dancing here before she gets married…It’s a rarity here,” he thought, as Natasha, straightening a rose that had gone awry on her corsage, was sitting down beside him.
“I wouldn’t have believed it if someone had told me I could love so much,” said Prince Andrei. “It’s quite a different feeling from what I knew before. The whole world is divided for me into two parts: one is she, and there is all happiness, hope, light; the other is where she is not, and there everything is dejection and darkness…”
“Yes, stories!” Rostov began speaking loudly, glancing now at Boris, now at Bolkonsky, with eyes suddenly grown furious. “Yes, many stories are told, but our stories—the stories of those who were there, right under enemy fire—our stories have weight, not the stories of those fellows on the staff, who get rewards for doing nothing.”
“If we fought before,” he said, “and gave no quarter to the French, as at Sch&#246;ngraben, how will it be now when he himself is at our head? We’ll all die, we’ll gladly die for him. Right, gentlemen? Maybe I’m not speaking well, I’ve drunk a lot; but that’s how I feel, and so do you. To the health of Alexander the First! Hurrah!”
On the eve of his departure from Petersburg, Prince Andrei brought along Pierre, who had not once been to the Rostovs’ since the time of the ball. Pierre looked perplexed and embarrassed. He was talking with the mother. Natasha sat down with Sonya by the chess table, thereby inviting Prince Andrei to join her. He went over to them.
The red Lyubim overtook Milka, precipitously threw himself at the wolf, and seized him by the hindquarters, but in the same second became frightened and jumped over to the other side. The wolf crouched, clacked his teeth, got up again, and loped on, accompanied at two yards’ distance by all the dogs, who would not go nearer to him.
During his service, mostly as an adjutant, Prince Andrei had seen many anterooms  of significant persons, and the differing characters of these anterooms  were very clear to him. Count Arakcheev’s anteroom  had a completely special character. The insignificant persons waiting in line for an audience in Count Arakcheev’s anteroom…
“You’re dear to me especially because you’re the only live person in our whole society. That’s fine for you. Choose whatever you like; it’s all the same. You’ll be fine anywhere, but there’s one thing: stop going to those Kuragins and leading that sort of life. It simply doesn’t suit you: all this carousing with hussars, and all…”
“Well, what then, old boy, mon tr&#232;s honorable  Alphonse Karlych,” said Shinshin, chuckling and combining (which was a peculiarity of his speech) the simplest popular Russian expressions with refined French phrases. “Vous comptez vous faire des rentes sur l’&#233;tat, *109 you want to get a little something from your company?”
“I’m sure to die before you. Know that these are my journals, to be given to the sovereign after my death. Now here is a Lombard note53 and a letter: it’s a prize for whoever writes the history of Suvorov’s campaigns. To be sent to the Academy. Here are my jottings, read them for yourself when I’m gone, you’ll find useful things.”
“I sent Uvarka to listen at dawn,” his bass said after a moment’s silence. “He says she transferred  them to the Otradnoe reserve, they were howling there.” (“Transferred” meant that the she-wolf they both knew about had gone with her cubs to the Otradnoe woods, which was a mile and a half from the house and was a small preserve.)
In one of the moments of awkward silence during which Anatole calmly and persistently stared at her with his prominent eyes, Natasha, to break the silence, asked him how he liked Moscow. Natasha asked it and blushed. She kept feeling that she was doing something indecent in speaking with him. Anatole smiled, as if encouraging her.
Anatole was obviously waiting by the door for the Rostovs to come in. Having greeted the count, he at once went up to Natasha and followed her. As soon as Natasha saw him, she was seized by the same feeling as in the theater, of vain pleasure at being liked by him, and of fear because of the absence of moral barriers between them.
Kutuzov fell back towards Vienna, destroying behind him the bridges over the rivers Inn (in Braunau) and Traun (in Linz). On the twenty-third of October, the Russian troops were crossing the river Enns. At midday Russian transport, artillery, and troop columns were strung out through the town of Enns, on both sides of the bridge.
“Look at your inner man with spiritual eyes and ask if you are pleased with yourself. What have you achieved, being guided by reason alone? What are you? You are young, you are rich, you are educated, my dear sir. What have you done with all these good things that have been given you? Are you content with yourself and your life?”
The war was heating up, and its theater was approaching the borders of Russia. Everywhere curses were heard on the enemy of the human race Bonapartius; militia and recruits were being gathered from the villages, and divergent news kept coming from the theater of the war, false as usual and therefore reinterpreted in various ways.
“You know, I’ve entrusted him with our secret,” said Prince Andrei. “I’ve known him since childhood. He has a heart of gold. I beg you, Natalie,” he suddenly said earnestly, “I’m going away. God knows what may happen. You may stop lov…Well, I know I mustn’t talk about that. One thing—whatever happens with you while I’m not here…”
Then the same people, with undiminished satisfaction and fear, saw how the young count, all red, with bloodshot eyes, dragged Mitenka out by the scruff of the neck, chose a convenient moment between his words, applied foot and knee with great deftness to his rear end, and shouted: “Out, scoundrel, and don’t leave a trace behind!”
“Princesse, il faut que je vous pr&#233;vienne,”  she added, lowering her voice, “le prince a eu une altercation,”  she said, deliberately swallowing her r ’s and listening to herself with pleasure, “une altercation avec Michel Ivanoff. Il est de tr&#232;s mauvaise humeur, tr&#232;s morose. Soyez pr&#233;venue, vous savez…” †152
He reached out and put his hand on the purse. Rostov let go of it. Telyanin took the purse and began to lower it into the pocket of his riding breeches, his eyebrows raised casually, and his mouth slightly open, as if he was saying: “Yes, yes, I’m putting my purse in my pocket, and it’s quite simple, and it’s nobody’s business.”
When Prince Andrei left the palace, he felt that all the interest and happiness afforded him by the victory had now left him and been given over into the indifferent hands of the minister of war and the courteous adjutant. His whole way of thinking changed instantly: the battle appeared to him now as a long-past, far-off memory.
“Yes. And do you remember how papa in his dark blue overcoat fired a gun on the porch?” Smiling with pleasure, they went through their memories, not sad, old people’s memories, but poetic, youthful ones, those impressions from the very distant past where dream merges with reality, and they laughed softly, rejoicing at something.
“I’ve already told you, papa,” said his son, “that if you don’t want to let me go, I’ll stay. But I know I’m not good for anything but military service; I’m not a diplomat, not a functionary, I’m unable to hide my feelings,” he said, glancing all the while with the coquetry of a handsome youth at Sonya and the young lady guest.
“So you see, my dear princess and cousin, Katerina Semyonovna,” Prince Vassily continued, evidently getting himself to continue his talk only after an inner struggle, “at moments like this, it is necessary to think of everything. It is necessary to think of the future, of you…I love you all like my own children, you know that.”
“You didn’t get my letter?” he asked, and, not waiting for an answer, which he would not have received, because the princess was unable to speak, he went back and, together with the accoucheur, who came in behind him (they had met at the last posting station), came upstairs again with quick steps, and again embraced his sister.
Prince Andrei followed every word and movement of Speransky with special attention. As happens with people, especially those who judge their neighbors severely, Prince Andrei, on meeting a new person, especially one whom, like Speransky, he knew by reputation, always expected to find in him the full perfection of human virtues.
Several times the countess said to her son, with tears in her eyes, that, now that both her daughters were settled, her sole desire was to see him married. She said she would go peacefully to her grave if that happened. Then she said that she had her eye on a wonderful girl and tried to draw out his opinion concerning marriage.
He came out, springing briskly at every step, his head slightly thrown back. The whole of his stout, short figure, with its broad, fat shoulders and involuntarily thrust-out stomach and chest, had that imposing, stately look which pampered forty-year-old men have. Besides, it was clear that he was in very good spirits that day.
Reading this passage, Pierre felt for the first time that between him and H&#233;l&#232;ne some sort of connection had been formed, recognized by other people, and this thought at the same time frightened him, as if an obligation had been laid upon him which he could not fulfill, and also pleased him as an amusing supposition.
“Yes, yes, who else? I’d never have believed it, but this feeling is stronger than I am. Yesterday I was tormented, I suffered, but I wouldn’t trade that torment for anything in the world. I’ve never lived before. Only now am I alive, but I can’t live without her. But can she love me?…I’m too old for her…Why don’t you speak?…”
“Besides that, Pyotr Nikolaevich, in transferring to the guards, I am in view,” Berg went on, “and vacancies in the foot guards are much more frequent. Then, consider for yourself how I’m able to get along on two hundred and thirty rubles. Yet I save some and also send some to my father,” he went on, letting out a smoke ring.
“Mais, mon prince,”  said Anna Mikhailovna, “give him a moment’s rest after such a great sacrament. Here, Pierre, tell us your opinion,” she turned to the young man who, coming up close to them, looked with astonishment at the princess’s spiteful face, which had lost all decency, and at the twitching cheeks of Prince Vassily.
“Peut-&#234;tre plus tard je vous dirai, mon cher, que si je n’avais pas &#233;t&#233; l&#224;, Dieu sait ce que serait arriv&#233;. Vous savez mon oncle avant-hier encore me promettait de ne pas oublier Boris. Mais il n’a pas eu le temps. J’esp&#232;re, mon cher ami, que vous remplirez le d&#233;sir de votre p&#232;re.” *145
The affair was presented by the offended side in such guise that, after seizing the transport, Major Denisov, uninvited, in a drunken state, appeared at the quartermaster general’s, called him a thief, threatened him with a beating, and, when removed, rushed into the office, attacked two clerks, and dislocated the arm of one.
Sonya had not seen anything, she had been just about to blink her eyes and get up when she heard Natasha’s voice say “She’s sure to…” She did not want to disappoint either Dunyasha or Natasha, and it was hard to go on sitting there. She did not know how and why that cry had escaped her when she covered her eyes with her hand.
“That I don’t know. Eh?” said Anatole, taking heart as Pierre overcame his wrath. “That I don’t know and don’t want to know,” he said, not looking at Pierre and with a slight trembling of his lower jaw, “but you have spoken to me in such words—‘mean’ and the like—as I, comme un homme d’honneur, †388 will not allow to anyone.”
Prince Andrei, on the first moment of his arrival in Moscow, had received from his father Natasha’s note to Princess Marya, in which she refused her fianc&#233; (Mlle Bourienne had stolen this note from Princess Marya and given it to the prince), and had heard stories from his father about Natasha’s abduction, with additions.
When Boris came in, Pierre was pacing his room, stopping now and then in the corners, making threatening gestures to the wall, as if piercing the invisible enemy with a sword, and looking sternly over his spectacles, and then starting his promenade again, uttering vague words, shrugging his shoulders, and spreading his arms.
The face of Kutuzov, who was standing in the doorway of his office, remained perfectly immobile for a few moments. Then a wrinkle passed like a wave over his face, his brow became smooth again, he inclined his head deferentially, closed his eyes, silently allowed Mack to pass, followed him in, and closed the door behind him.
“What I did was repack everything I need onto two horses,” said Nesvitsky, “and I had excellent packs made for me. I could skip off over the Bohemian Mountains now. It’s bad, brother. But you’re surely unwell, the way you’re shivering?” asked Nesvitsky, noticing how Prince Andrei twitched as if he had touched a Leiden jar.16
Nikolai Rostov, with Denisov and his new acquaintance, Dolokhov, sat together almost at the middle of the table. Opposite them sat Pierre, beside Prince Nesvitsky. Count Ilya Andreich sat opposite Bagration, together with the other stewards, and did the honors for Prince Bagration, personifying Moscow hospitality in himself.
“In purifying and setting to rights our members, we try, thirdly, to set to rights the whole human race, offering it, through our members, an example of piety and virtue, and thereby trying with all our might to oppose the evil that reigns in the world. Think it over, and I will come to you again,” he said and left the room.
“Well, my dear,” Prince Vassily said jokingly, “say ‘yes’ to me, and I’ll write to her myself, and we can kill the fatted calf.”7 But Prince Vassily had no time to finish his joke, because Pierre, with a fury in his face that was reminiscent of his father, without looking his interlocutor in the eye, said in a quiet whisper:
Not in vain had Berg displayed to everyone his right arm wounded at Austerlitz and held his utterly useless sword in his left hand. He recounted the incident to everyone so persistently and with such importance that they all believed in the expediency and merit of this action—and Berg received two decorations for Austerlitz.
Anatole left the room and came back in a few moments wearing a fur coat with a silver belt and a sable hat, dashingly cocked to one side, which was very becoming to his handsome face. After looking in the mirror, he stood in front of Dolokhov in the same posture he had assumed in front of the mirror and took a glass of wine.
Life meanwhile, people’s real life with its essential concerns of health, illness, work, rest, with its concerns of thought, learning, poetry, music, love, friendship, hatred, passions, went on as always, independently and outside of any political closeness or enmity with Napoleon Bonaparte and outside all possible reforms.
Two of the troikas were for everyday driving; the third was the old count’s, with an Orel trotter in the shafts; the fourth was Nikolai’s own, with a small, shaggy black shaft horse. Nikolai, in his old lady’s outfit, over which he put a belted hussar’s cape, stood in the middle of his sleigh with a short grip on the reins.
The father announced to the son that he would pay half his debts for the last time, but only on condition that he go to Moscow in his capacity as the commander in chief’s adjutant, which he had solicited for him, and try finally to find a good match for himself there. He pointed out Princess Marya and Julie Karagin for him.
“I don’t like these fashionable churches,” she said, obviously proud of her freedom of thought. “God is the same everywhere. We have a wonderful priest, he celebrates properly, with some nobility, and so does the deacon. Is it some sort of holiness if the choir sings a concert? I don’t like it, it’s nothing but indulgence!”
Suddenly the angry, squirrel-like expression on the princess’s beautiful little face changed to an attractive and compassion-provoking expression of fear; her pretty eyes glanced from under her eyebrows at her husband, and her face acquired the timid and admissive look of a dog rapidly but weakly wagging its drooping tail.
“I’m saying it to you sincerely as a friend. Consider. Where will you go now, and what for, when you can stay here? One of two things awaits you” (he gathered the skin over his left temple): “either peace will be concluded before you reach the army, or it will be defeat and disgrace along with the whole of Kutuzov’s army.”
Pierre felt that he was the center of everything, and this position delighted and embarrassed him. He found himself in the state of a man immersed in some occupation. He neither saw, nor understood, nor heard anything clearly. Only rarely, unexpectedly, did fragmentary thoughts and impressions of reality flash in his soul.
“Hm! this excellence  is a little brat…I solicited his post for him in the ministry,” the prince said peevishly. “And why the son, I cannot comprehend. Princess Lizaveta Karlovna and Princess Marya may know, but I don’t know why they’re bringing this son here. I have no need of him.” And he looked at his blushing daughter.
A short, stout man of about thirty, in white trousers, top boots, and nothing but an evidently just-put-on cambric shirt, was standing in this room; a valet behind him was buttoning on a pair of splendid new silk-embroidered suspenders, which Rostov noticed for some reason. This man was talking to someone in the next room.
“Don’t leave!” was all she said to him, in a voice which made him wonder whether he ought indeed to stay, and which he remembered long afterwards. When he was gone, she also did not cry; but for several days she sat, not crying, in her room, not interested in anything and only saying from time to time: “Ah, why did he go?”
Julie played the most mournful nocturnes on the harp for Boris. Boris read Poor Liza 9 aloud to her and interrupted his reading more than once from emotions that robbed him of breath. Meeting at a large gathering, Julie and Boris looked at each other as the only people in a sea of the indifferent who understood each other.
When Gavrilo came to report to Marya Dmitrievna that the people who had come had run away, she frowned, stood up, and, putting her hands behind her back, paced the rooms for a long time, reflecting on what to do. Towards midnight, feeling the key in her pocket, she went to Natasha’s room. Sonya sat weeping in the corridor.
“What did he say? Where to now? A halt, or what? Did he thank us, or what?” eager questions came from all sides, and the entire moving mass began to push upon itself (evidently those in front had stopped), and a rumor spread that there was an order to halt. They all halted where they were, in the middle of the muddy road.
Now it was not, as before, an invisible river flowing in the darkness, but like a gloomy sea subsiding and quivering after a storm. Rostov mindlessly watched and listened to what was happening before him and around him. An infantryman came up to the fire, squatted down, put his hands to the fire, and turned his face away.
The score reached the fateful number of forty-three thousand. Rostov prepared a card which was to go corners on the three thousand just given him, when Dolokhov tapped the deck on the table, set it aside, and, taking the chalk, quickly began in his clear, strong hand, breaking the piece of chalk, to add up Rostov’s score.
Prince Andrei listened to his laughter and looked at the laughing Speransky with surprise and sad disappointment. This was not Speransky but another man, as it seemed to Prince Andrei. Everything in Speransky that had formerly seemed mysterious and attractive to Prince Andrei suddenly became clear and unattractive to him.
“What do you mean, excellent?” Natasha said with reproach, feeling the tone with which her brother had said it. “It’s not excellent, it’s simply lovely!” Just as the uncle’s mushrooms, honey, and liqueurs seemed the best in the world to her, so this song, too, seemed to her at that moment the height of musical loveliness.
The countess’s health still did not improve; but it was no longer possible to put off the trip to Moscow. A dowry had to be prepared, the house had to be sold, and, besides, Prince Andrei was first expected in Moscow, where Prince Nikolai Andreich was spending that winter, and Natasha was sure that he had already arrived.
He exchanged a few words with Prince Andrei and Chernyshov about the present war, with the expression of a man who knows beforehand that it will all go badly and who is not even displeased by that. The unbrushed tufts of hair on his nape and his hastily slicked down side-whiskers were the most eloquent confirmation of it.
The adjutant had been sent from headquarters to confirm to the regimental commander what had been said unclearly in the previous day’s order, namely, that the commander in chief wished to see the regiment in exactly the same condition it had been in on the march—in greatcoats, in dustcovers, and without any preparations.
But these words sounded like a pitiful, desperate cry and a plea for forgiveness. As soon as Rostov heard the sound of that voice, a huge burden of doubt fell from his soul. He felt joy and in the same instant also pity for the wretched man standing before him; but he had to bring the matter he had begun to a conclusion.
He opened his eyes and looked up. The black canopy of the night hung three feet above the light from the coals. A dust of falling snow flew through that light. Tushin did not return, the doctor did not come. He was alone, only some little soldier now sat naked on the other side of the fire, warming his thin, yellow body.
Sonya fell to thinking. The question of how to write to Nicolas, and whether she should write to him, was a question that tormented her. Now that he was already an officer and a wounded hero, would it be right on her part to remind him of herself and, as it were, of the commitment he had taken upon himself in her regard.
Pierre was struck by the modesty of this small though clean house, after those magnificent conditions in which he had last seen his friend in Petersburg. He went quickly into the little reception room, unplastered and still smelling of pine, and wanted to go further, but Anton ran ahead on tiptoe and knocked on the door.
“Good girl, Milushka!” Nikolai cried triumphantly. It seemed that Milka was about to hit the hare and snatch him up, but she drew level and missed him. The hare leaped aside. Again the beautiful Yerza was on the hare and hovering right over his tail, as if measuring so as not to miss this time and take him by the haunch.
Morning came with its cares and bustle. Everybody got up, began to move, to talk, again the dressmakers came, again Marya Dmitrievna came out, and tea was served. Natasha looked at them all uneasily, with wide-open eyes, as if she wanted to catch every glance directed at her, and tried to seem the same as she always was.
“Well, let her sleep,” said Marya Dmitrievna, going out of the room, thinking she was asleep. But Natasha was not asleep, and her fixed, wide-open eyes looked straight ahead from her pale face. Natasha did not sleep all that night, did not weep, and did not speak with Sonya, who got up several times and went over to her.
That same evening Pierre went to the Rostovs to carry out his errand. Natasha was in bed, the count was at the club, and Pierre, having delivered the letters to Sonya, went to see Marya Dmitrievna, who was interested to know how Prince Andrei had taken the news. Ten minutes later, Sonya came into Marya Dmitrievna’s room.
Consequently, it needed only that Metternich, Rumyantsev, or Talleyrand, between levee and rout, make a little better effort and write a more skillful dispatch, or that Napoleon write to Alexander: Monsieur, mon fr&#232;re, je consens &#224; rendre le duch&#233; au duc d’Oldenbourg *390 —and there would have been no war.
“There’s still time, my friend. Remember, Catiche, it was all done inadvertently, in a moment of wrath, illness, and then forgotten. Our duty, my dear, is to correct his mistake, to alleviate his last moments by not allowing him to do this injustice, by not letting him die thinking he has made unhappy those people who…”
“I won’t allow anyone to call me a liar!” cried Rostov. “He called me a liar, and I called him a liar. Let it remain at that. He can assign me to duty every day, or put me under arrest, but no one will make me apologize, because if he, as the regimental commander, considers it beneath him to give me satisfaction, then…”
“You see, Prince, we can’t rid ourselves of these folk,” said the staff officer, pointing to them. “The commanders neglect discipline. And here,” he pointed to a sutler’s tent, “they crowd in and sit. This morning I drove them all out: look, it’s full again. We must ride over, Prince, and scare them away. For a moment.”
The infantry regiments, caught unawares in the woods, ran out of the woods, and, companies mixing with other companies, retreated in disordered crowds. One soldier uttered in fear the words: “Cut off!”—senseless and terrible in time of war—and the words, together with the fear, communicated themselves to the whole mass.
Sonya walked across the reception room to the pantry with a glass in her hand. Natasha looked at her, at the crack of the pantry door, and it seemed to her that she remembered light coming through the crack in the pantry door and Sonya passing by with a glass. “Yes, that happened, too, in the same way,” Natasha thought.
Princess Marya wrote that she was in despair because of the misunderstanding that had occurred between them. Whatever her father’s feelings were, wrote Princess Marya, she asked Natasha to believe that she could not but love her as the one chosen by her brother, for whose happiness she was ready to sacrifice everything.
“He’s lucky he got away from me; but I’ll find him,” she said in her rough voice. “Do you hear what I say?” She put her big hand under Natasha’s face and turned it towards her. Both Marya Dmitrievna and Sonya were surprised, seeing Natasha’s face. Her eyes were glittering and dry, her lips compressed, her cheeks sunken.
“Ah, Pierre,” said the countess, going to her husband. “You don’t know what position our Anatole…” She stopped, seeing in her husband’s lowered head, his face, his flashing eyes, his resolute stride, that terrible expression of rage and strength which she knew and had experienced personally after his duel with Dolokhov.
Driving up to the porch of a large house near the horse guards’ barracks, in which Anatole lived, he went up the lighted porch, the stairs, and entered an open door. There was no one in the front hall; empty bottles, capes, galoshes were lying about; there was a smell of wine, the noise of distant talking and shouting.
The rumor that had already spread earlier about the defeat of the Austrians and the surrender of the entire army at Ulm turned out to be true. Within half an hour adjutants had been sent out in various directions with orders demonstrating that the Russian troops, so far inactive, would soon also have to meet the enemy.
“Well, there, yes, yes!” Boris said, smiling. “And we also had a nice march. You know, the grand duke constantly rode with our regiment, and so we had all the conveniences and advantages. The receptions we had in Poland, the dinners, the balls—I can’t tell you! And the grand duke was very gracious to all our officers.”
And Boris began telling how the guards, taking up their position and seeing troops in front of them, took them for Austrians, and suddenly, from the cannonballs fired from those troops, realized that they were in the front line and had unexpectedly to go into action. Rostov, not hearing Boris out, touched up his horse.
“You mustn’t, you mustn’t!” a frightened voice said from inside. He started pacing the room. The cries ceased, another few seconds went by. Suddenly a terrible cry—not her cry, she could not cry like that—came from the next room. Prince Andrei rushed to the door; the cry ceased, but another cry was heard, a baby’s cry.
The grand master suggested that they fulfill the last duty, and the important dignitary, who bore the title of alms collector, started making the round of the brothers. Pierre wanted to write down all the money he had on the list of alms, but was afraid of showing pride and wrote down the same amount as the others did.
As soon as Prince Andrei abandoned his everyday occupations, and especially as soon as he entered the former conditions of life, in which he had lived when he was still happy, life’s anguish took hold of him with its former force, and he hastened to get away quickly from those memories and quickly find something to do.
From her big eyes shone rays of a kindly and timid light. These eyes lit up her whole thin, sickly face and made it beautiful. Her brother wanted to take the icon, but she stopped him. Andrei understood, made the sign of the cross, and kissed the icon. His face was at the same time tender (he was touched) and mocking.
Prince Andrei looked at Kutuzov and his eyes were involuntarily struck by the carefully washed creases of the scar on Kutuzov’s temple, a foot away from him, where the Izmail bullet had pierced his head and put out his eye. “Yes, he has the right to speak so calmly about the deaths of these people!” thought Bolkonsky.
Five minutes later Denisov came into the shed, climbed onto the bed in his muddy boots, angrily smoked his pipe, scattered all his belongings around, strapped on his riding whip and saber, and started out of the dugout. To Rostov’s question, where to?—he answered angrily and vaguely that there was business to be done.
“I don’t know your sister well enough,” Prince Andrei replied with a mocking smile, behind which he hoped to hide his embarrassment, “to answer such a subtle question. And besides, I’ve observed that the less attractive the woman, the more constant she is,” he added and looked at Pierre, who approached them just then.
Petya was carried out and laid like a dead body in the break; Natasha and Nikolai got into the droshky. The uncle wrapped Natasha up and said good-bye to her with a completely new tenderness. He went with them on foot to the bridge, which they had to wade around, and ordered the hunters to ride in front with lanterns.
“No,” said Natasha, though in fact she had also been thinking at the same time about Prince Andrei and how he would have liked their uncle. “And I’ve also been repeating, all the way I’ve been repeating: how well Anisyushka stepped out, how well…” said Natasha. And Nikolai heard her ringing, causeless, happy laughter.
Natasha did not understand what he said, nor did he himself, but she felt that there was some indecent purpose in his incomprehensible words. She did not know what to say, and she turned away as if she had not heard what he said. But as soon as she turned away, she thought that he was there behind her, so near to her.
It was extremely strange for Balashov, after his closeness to the highest power and might, after his conversation three hours earlier with the sovereign, and generally in the habit of being honored in his service, to see here, on Russian soil, this hostile, and above all disrespectful, treatment of him by brute force.
Oh, how that third had vibrated, and how touched was something that was best in Rostov’s soul. And that something was independent of anything in the world and higher than anything in the world. What are gambling losses, and Dolokhovs, and words of honor!…It’s all nonsense! One can kill, and steal, and still be happy…
“I’ve heard about you,” the traveler went on, “and about the misfortune that has befallen you, my dear sir.” (He underlined, as it were, the word misfortune,  as if to say: “Yes, misfortune, whatever you may call it, I know that what happened to you in Moscow was a misfortune.”) “I am very sorry for it, my dear sir.”
None of them, not even the not-so-young Dimmler, wanted to break off the conversation and leave the sitting room, but Natasha got up and Nikolai sat at the clavichord. As always, Natasha stood in the middle of the room, choosing the most advantageous place for resonance, and began to sing her mother’s favorite piece.
“Let’s not talk, my friend, I’ll tell him everything; but I ask one thing of you—consider me your friend, and if you need help, advice, or simply to pour out your soul to somebody—not now, but when your soul is clear—remember me.” He took her hand and kissed it. “I’ll be happy if I’m able to…” Pierre became confused.
The sovereign’s inspiring of the people and calling them to the defense of the fatherland—that very inspiring of the people (insofar as it was produced by the sovereign’s presence in Moscow) which was the chief cause of Russia’s triumph—was presented to and accepted by the sovereign as a pretext for leaving the army.
“Glad to be of…Your Ex-ex-ex-ex-ex!…” rolled through the ranks. A sullen soldier, marching on the left, turned his eyes to Bagration as he shouted, with an expression that seemed to say: “We know it ourselves” another, without looking and as if fearing to be distracted, opened his mouth wide, shouted, and passed by.
Just then Anna Mikhailovna stepped inaudibly into the room, with the business-like, preoccupied, and at the same time meek Christian look that never left her. Though Anna Mikhailovna found the count in his dressing gown every day, he became embarrassed each time and apologized for his costume. He did so now as well.
In the night he called his valet and told him to pack up to go to Petersburg. He could not remain under the same roof with her. He could not imagine how he was going to speak to her now. He decided that he would go the next day and leave her a letter in which he would announce his intention to part with her forever.
Alexander and Napoleon, with the long tail of their suite, approached the right flank of the Preobrazhensky battalion, riding straight at the crowd that was standing there. The crowd unexpectedly found itself so close to the emperors that Rostov, who was standing in the first rows, was afraid he would be recognized.
“Ah, ch&#232;re, je ne vous reconnaissais pas,”  Anna Mikhailovna said with a happy smile, approaching the count’s niece at a light amble. “Je viens d’arriver et je suis &#224; vous pour vous aider &#224; soigner  mon oncle. J’imagine combien vous avez souffert,” ‡102 she added, rolling up her eyes sympathetically.
The princess said nothing. All that could be heard were the sounds of the efforts of the struggle over the portfolio. It was clear that if she did start to talk, it would not be flattering for Anna Mikhailovna. Anna Mikhailovna held on tight, but in spite of that her voice retained all its sweet, drawling softness.
Lemarrois had just come galloping to Murat with the menacing letter from Bonaparte, and the shamed Murat, wishing to smooth over his mistake, at once moved his troops up to the center and around both flanks, hoping before evening and the emperor’s arrival to crush the insignificant detachment that stood facing him.
“But I know why she’d be ashamed,” said Petya, offended by Natasha’s first remark, “because she was in love with that fat one in spectacles” (so Petya described his namesake, the new Count Bezukhov); “now she’s in love with this singer” (Petya was referring to Natasha’s Italian singing teacher): “so she’s ashamed.”
“Be so good as to call on us, since you know my fine lad…you’re together there…two heroes…Ah, Vassily Ignatyich…greetings, old boy,” he addressed a little old man who was passing by, but before he finished the greeting everything stirred, and a servant came running with a frightened face and announced: “He’s here!”
The thing was that Ilagin, with whom the Rostovs had had a quarrel and a lawsuit, used to hunt in places that customarily belonged to the Rostovs, and now as if on purpose had sent his men to the reserve where the Rostovs were hunting and had allowed his hunter to take the quarry hunted down by the Rostovs’ hounds.
“Count, Count!” cried Berg, as animated as Boris, running up to him from the other side. “Count, I’m wounded in the right hand,” he said, showing his hand, bloody and bandaged with a handkerchief, “and I stayed in the line. I hold the sword in my left hand, Count: our race, the von Bergs, Count, were all knights.”
On the twenty-sixth of February, 1807, the old prince left on his rounds. Prince Andrei stayed at Bald Hills, as he did most often during his father’s absence. Little Nikolushka had been ill for three days now. The coachman who drove the old prince came back from town bringing papers and letters for Prince Andrei.
“I cannot, General, and the reason why I cannot is that the law is stronger than I,” said the sovereign, and he raised his foot to the stirrup. The general inclined his head deferentially, the sovereign mounted and rode down the street at a gallop. Rostov, beside himself with rapture, ran after him with the crowd.
Natasha, the young Melyukovs’ favorite, disappeared with them into the back room, asking to be brought cork and various house robes and men’s clothing, which the girls’ bare arms received from a footman through a slightly open door. In ten minutes all the young people of the Melyukov family had joined the mummers.
“What do I care if M’sieur Pierre is here,” the little princess said suddenly, and her pretty face suddenly spread into a tearful grimace. “I’ve long wanted to say to you, Andr&#233;: why have you changed so much towards me? What have I done to you? You’re going into the army, you have no pity for me. Why is it?”
“But, my dear princess,” Anna Mikhailovna was saying meekly and persuasively, barring the way to the bedroom and preventing the princess from going in, “won’t it be too hard on poor, dear uncle at such a moment, when he needs rest? To talk about worldly things at such a moment, when his soul is already prepared…”
“So you never noticed before how beautiful I am?” H&#233;l&#232;ne seemed to say. “You never noticed that I am a woman? Yes, I am a woman who could belong to anyone, even you,” said her gaze. And at that moment Pierre felt that H&#233;l&#232;ne not only could, but must be his wife, that it could not be otherwise.
“All this had to be so and could not be otherwise,” thought Pierre, “therefore there’s no point in asking whether it’s good or bad. It’s good because it’s definite, and there’s no more of the old tormenting doubt.” Pierre silently held his fianc&#233;e’s hand and looked at her beautiful breast rising and falling.
“Ah, my friend, he’s very unfortunate,” she said. “If what we’ve heard is true, it’s terrible. And could we have thought of it when we rejoiced over his happiness? And such a lofty, heavenly soul, this young Bezukhov! Yes, I pity him with all my soul, and I’ll try to give him comfort, as far as it depends on me.”
“Coco, you’re home, come here to me, my dearest,” the countess’s voice came from the drawing room. Nikolai went over to his mother, kissed her hand, silently sat down at her table, and began watching her hands, which were laying out cards. From the reception room came laughter and merry voices persuading Natasha.
“The director of the commission on military regulations is a good friend of mine—Mr. Magnitsky,” he said, articulating each syllable and each word, “and if you wish, I could bring you together with him.” (He paused at the period.) “I hope you will find sympathy in him and a desire to further everything sensible.”
What produced this extraordinary event? What were its causes? Historians say with na&#239;ve assurance that the causes of this event were the offense inflicted upon the duke of Oldenburg, the non-observance of the Continental System,1 Napoleon’s love of power, Alexander’s firmness, diplomatic mistakes, and so on.
The cries and fires in the enemy army came from the fact that, while Napoleon’s orders were being read to the troops, the emperor himself rode around his bivouacs. The soldiers, seeing the emperor, set fire to bundles of straw and ran after him, shouting, “Vive l’empereur!”  Napoleon’s orders were the following:
Hot lips pressed themselves to her lips, and at the same moment she felt herself released again, and heard the rustle of H&#233;l&#232;ne’s dress in the room and the sound of her footsteps. Natasha glanced at H&#233;l&#232;ne, then, red and trembling, gave him a fearfully questioning glance and went to the door.
“And if Your Excellency will allow me to voice my opinion,” he went on, “we owe the success of the day most of all to the operation of this battery and the heroic endurance of Captain Tushin and his company,” said Prince Andrei and, without waiting for a reply, he got up at once and stepped away from the table.
“No, no,” cried Natasha. “She and I already talked about it. We knew you’d say that. But it’s impossible, because, you see, if you say that—if you consider yourself bound by your word, it comes out as if she’d said it on purpose. It comes out as if you’re forced to marry her, and doesn’t come out right at all.”
Having returned to Moscow from the army, Nikolai Rostov was received by all the family as the best of sons, a hero, and their darling Nikolushka; by relations as a nice, agreeable, and courteous young man; by acquaintances as a handsome hussar lieutenant, an adroit dancer, and one of the best suitors in Moscow.
There was a thaw, mud, cold, the ice on the river broke up, the roads became impassable; for several days provisions had not been issued either to the horses or to the men. Since transport became impossible, men scattered over the abandoned, desolate villages looking for potatoes, but found little even of them.
“It seems you can’t break an axhead with a straw,” he said, coming from the window and handing Rostov a large envelope. This was a petition addressed to the sovereign, drawn up by the auditor, in which Denisov, without mentioning anything about the failures of the provisions department, merely begged for mercy.
Saying this, the countess glanced at her daughter. Natasha lay looking straight ahead fixedly at one of the carved mahogany sphinxes at the corners of the bed, so that the countess could see her daughter’s face only in profile. This face struck the countess by its especially serious and concentrated expression.
That smile said: “I’d be glad to rest and sit with you; I’m tired; but you see, I’ve been asked to dance, and I’m glad of it, and I’m happy, and I love everybody, and you and I understand all that,” and much, much more. When her partner left her, Natasha ran across the room to invite two ladies for the figures.
After this outburst, the prince never once spoke of the matter again. But his suppressed vexation with his son’s faint-heartedness showed itself in the relations between father and daughter. To the previous subjects of mockery a new one was added—talk about stepmothers and his amiability towards Mlle Bourienne.
She was reading and glancing at the sleeping Natasha, searching her face for an explanation of what she was reading and unable to find it. The face was gentle, meek, and happy. Clutching her chest to keep from choking, Sonya, pale and termbling with fear and agitation, sat in an armchair and dissolved in tears.
“Quelle d&#233;licatesse!” *250 thought the princess. “Can Am&#233;lie” (that was Mlle Bourienne’s name) “really think I could be jealous of her and not appreciate her pure affection for and devotion to me?” She went over to Mlle Bourienne and kissed her warmly. Anatole went to kiss the little princess’s hand.
“He is minister of war, the sovereign emperor’s trusted man; his personal qualities are nobody’s business; he was entrusted with considering my memorandum—consequently, he alone can set it in motion,” thought Prince Andrei, waiting among many significant and insignificant persons in Count Arakcheev’s anteroom.
“Why do you say that?” said Princess Marya. “Why do you say that now, when you’re going to this terrible war, and he’s so old! Mlle Bourienne said he asked about you…” As soon as she began to speak of it, her lips trembled and tears began to fall. Prince Andrei turned away from her and started pacing the room.
As if by the sounds of the most cheerful music, Rostov felt cheered at heart by these sounds, which he had not heard for so long. Trap-ta-ta-tap!—several shots clapped out, now together, now in rapid succession. Then all fell silent, and then came the crackling again, as if someone was walking on firecrackers.
The countess exchanged glances with Anna Mikhailovna. Anna Mikhailovna understood that she was being asked to take up this young man, and sitting beside him, she began speaking of his father; but, as with the countess, he gave her nothing but monosyllabic answers. The guests were all taken up with each other.
Pierre was sitting in the drawing room, where Shinshin, knowing he had come from abroad, had started a boring political conversation with him, in which other people joined. When the music began to play, Natasha came into the drawing room and, going straight up to Pierre, blushing and with laughing eyes, said:
Prince Andrei and his sister kissed each other’s hands, and he told her she was the same pleurnicheuse §161 she had always been. Princess Marya turned to her brother, and through her tears the loving, warm, and meek gaze of her big, luminous eyes, very beautiful at that moment, rested on Prince Andrei’s face.
Anna Mikhailovna sat down beside him, took her handkerchief, wiped the tears from his eyes, the letter stained by them, and her own tears, read the letter, reassured the count, and decided that she would prepare the countess over dinner and before tea, and after tea would announce everything, with God’s help.
“Zakhar is shouting that I should turn to the left, but why to the left?” Nikolai wondered. “Are we driving to the Melyukovs’? Can this be Melyukovka? We’re driving God knows where, and God knows what’s going on with us—and it’s very strange and good, what’s going on with us.” He glanced back into the sleigh.
This was that initial period of a campaign when the troops still find themselves in good order, almost on the level of a peacetime review of maneuvers, only with a tinge of warlike showiness in their dress, and with a moral tinge of that gaiety and enthusiasm that always accompany the beginning of a campaign.
“But, ma ch&#232;re, ” Prince Vassily said suddenly, clutching the little table to him, becoming animated, and beginning to speak more quickly, “what if a letter had been written to the sovereign and the count had asked to adopt Pierre? You understand, given the count’s merits, his request would be granted…”
“They told me you gave orders to harness up,” she said breathlessly (she had obviously come running), “and I wanted so much to talk more with you alone. God knows for how long we’re parting again. You’re not angry that I’ve come? You’ve changed very much, Andryusha,” she added, as if to explain her question.
The regimental commander, turning red, ran to his horse, took the stirrup in his trembling hands, threw his body over, straightened up, drew his sword, and, with a happy, resolute face, opening his mouth askew, prepared to shout. The regiment fluttered up briefly, like a bird preening itself, and grew still.
The hussar cornet Zherkov had belonged for some time to the rowdy company headed by Dolokhov in Petersburg. Abroad, Zherkov had encountered Dolokhov as a soldier, but had found it unnecessary to recognize him. Now, after Kutuzov had talked with the demoted man, he addressed him with the joy of an old friend.
Old Mikhailo was sleeping on a trunk. The footman Prokofy, the one who was so strong he could lift a carriage by the back rail, was sitting and plaiting slippers out of cloth trimmings. He glanced at the opening door, and his indifferent, sleepy expression suddenly transformed into a rapturously alarmed one.
“There’s nothing for me to understand!” Natasha cried with stubborn willfulness. “He’s wicked and unfeeling. I do like your Denisov, and he’s a carouser and all that, but even so I like him, which means I understand. I don’t know how to tell you; he has it all calculated, and I don’t like that. But Denisov…”
Boris remembered the Natasha of four years ago, in a short dress, with dark eyes shining from under her curls and a desperate, childish laugh, and therefore when quite a different Natasha came in, he became embarrassed and his face showed a delighted surprise. Natasha was glad of that expression on his face.
“One moment, one moment, don’t come in, papa!” she cried to her father, who had opened the door, still under the gauze of her skirt, which covered her whole face. Sonya slammed the door. A moment later the count was admitted. He was wearing a dark blue tailcoat, stockings and shoes, was perfumed and pomaded.
Behind them, in a green toque, with a happy, festive face, given over to the will of God, sat Anna Mikhailovna. In their box hung that atmosphere of an engaged couple which Natasha knew and loved so well. She turned away, and suddenly all that had been humiliating in her morning visit recalled itself to her.
“You’re a scoundrel and a villain, and I don’t know what restrains me from the pleasure of smashing your head with this,” said Pierre, expressing himself so artificially because he was speaking in French. He picked up a heavy paperweight and raised it threateningly, but at once hastened to set it down again.
“To enter Russia without a declaration of war. I will make peace only when not a single armed enemy remains on my soil,” he said. It seemed to Boris that the sovereign enjoyed uttering these words: he was pleased with the form in which he had expressed his thought, but displeased that Boris had overheard it.
“Why is it, I often wonder,” she began, in French as always, hurriedly and fussily sitting down in the armchair, “why is it that Annette has never married? How stupid you all are, messieurs,  not to have married her. Forgive me, but you understand nothing about women. You’re such an arguer, M’sieur Pierre.”
Seeing that smile, Rostov involuntarily began to smile himself and felt a still stronger surge of love for his sovereign. He wanted to show his love for the sovereign in some way. He knew that this was impossible and wanted to cry. The sovereign summoned the regimental commander and said a few words to him.
“I expected help from you, and there’s nothing, nothing—you, too!” said her eyes. She was not surprised that he had come; she did not understand that he had come. His coming had no relation to her suffering and its relief. The pain started again, and Marya Bogdanovna advised Prince Andrei to leave the room.
After these words, the Mason, as if tired after talking for so long, again leaned back on the sofa and closed his eyes. Pierre looked at this stern, motionless, almost dead old face and moved his lips soundlessly. He wanted to say: “Yes, a loathsome, idle, depraved life,” but he dared not break the silence.
“Where are we going?” thought Nikolai. “Across Sloping Meadow, it must be. But no, this is something new, I’ve never seen it before. This isn’t Sloping Meadow, or Diomkin Hill, it’s God knows what! It’s something new and magical. Well, whatever!” And, urging his horses on, he began to pass the first troika.
“Attendez, je n’ai pas fini…”  he said to Prince Andrei, seizing him by the arm. “Je suppose que l’intervention sera plus forte que la non-intervention. Et…”  He paused. “On ne pourra pas imputer &#224; la fin de nonrecevoir notre d&#233;p&#234;che du 28 novembre. Voil&#224; comment tout cela finira.” †205
The little princess, waddling, went around the table with small, quick steps, her bag of handwork hanging on her arm, and, cheerfully straightening her dress, sat down on the sofa near the silver samovar, looking as though everything she did was a partie de plaisir *27 for her and for everyone around her.
“Ah! The warrior! So you want to defeat Bonaparte?” said the old man, shaking his powdered head as much as the braided queue, which was in Tikhon’s hands, would let him. “At least give him a good drubbing, or pretty soon he’ll be writing us down, too, as his subjects. Greetings!” And he offered his cheek.
In October 1805 Russian troops were occupying villages and towns in the archduchy of Austria, and more new regiments kept arriving from Russia to be stationed by the fortress of Braunau, burdening the local inhabitants with their billeting. In Braunau the commander in chief, Kutuzov, had his headquarters.
Lavrushka rummaged through the whole bed, looked under it, looked under the table, rummaged about everywhere, and stopped in the middle of the room. Denisov silently followed Lavrushka’s movements, and when Lavrushka spread his arms in surprise, saying it was not to be found anywhere, he looked at Rostov.
The princess saw that her father looked unfavorably on this matter, but at the same moment it occurred to her that her fate in life would be decided now or never. She lowered her eyes so as not to see his gaze, under the influence of which she felt she could not think but only obey out of habit, and said:
The countess had been prepared during dinner by Anna Mikhailovna’s hints. Going to her room, she sat in an armchair, not taking her eyes from the miniature portrait of her son on a snuffbox, and tears welled up in her eyes. Anna Mikhailovna came to the countess’s room on tiptoe with the letter and paused.
“Yes, like a man, everything as it should be, and so he started, he started persuading her, and she should have kept him busy talking till cockcrow, but she got timid; she just got timid and covered her face with her hands. So he up and grabbed her. It’s a good thing the maids came running in right then…”
“Ah, my friend!” he said, taking Pierre by the elbow; and in his voice there was sincerity and weakness, such as Pierre had never noticed in him before. “We sin so much, we deceive so much, and all for what? I’m over fifty, my friend…I’ll…Everything ends in death, everything. Death is terrible.” He wept.
By the back gate where he had stopped, Dolokhov was struggling with the yard porter, who had tried to lock the gate after Anatole went in. With a final effort, Dolokhov shoved the porter away and, as Anatole ran out, seized him by the arm, pulled him through the gate, and ran back with him to the troika.
“Third,” Pierre went on, not listening to him, “you are never to say a word about what happened between you and the countess. I know I can’t forbid you that, but if there’s a spark of conscience in you…” Pierre silently paced the room several times. Anatole sat by the table, frowning and biting his lips.
Prince Nikolai Andreevich sat in his usual place at the end of the sofa, moved a chair for Prince Vassily towards him, pointed to it, and began asking questions about political matters and the latest news. He listened as if with attention to Prince Vassily’s account, but kept glancing at Princess Marya.
From early morning strenuous bustling and efforts had begun, and by ten o’clock everything had reached the required order. The ranks were drawn up on the enormous field. The entire army was stretched out in three lines. In the front, the cavalry; behind them, the artillery; further behind, the infantry.
One could see the puffs of gunsmoke as if running and chasing each other on the slopes, and the smoke of the cannon swirling, spreading, and merging together. One could see, from the gleam of bayonets amidst the smoke, the moving masses of infantry and the narrow strips of artillery with green caissons.
As soon as Natasha finished singing, she went over to him and asked him how he liked her voice. She asked it and became embarrassed just after she said it, realizing that it was not a question to be asked. He smiled, looking at her, and said that he liked her singing just as he liked everything she did.
“I think no one has been so courtis&#233;e  as she,” Vera said, “but till recently she never liked anyone seriously. You know, Count,” she turned to Pierre, “even our dear cousin Boris, who, entre nous,  was quite, quite dans le pays du tendre… ”†351 she said, alluding to the then popular map of love.22
But in spite of that, Natasha, now excited, now frightened, her eyes staring, lay for a long time in her mother’s bed that evening. She told her how he had praised her, then how he had said he would be going abroad, then had asked where they would spend the summer, then how he had asked her about Boris.
The signs of Natasha’s illness were that she ate little, slept little, coughed, and never became animated. The doctors said that the sick girl must not be left without medical help, and therefore she was kept in the close air of the city. In the summer of 1812, the Rostovs did not leave for the country.
The room was in semi-darkness, only two icon lamps burned before the icons, and there was a good smell of incense and flowers. The whole room was filled with small furniture: little chiffoniers, cupboards, tables. Behind a screen the white covers of a high featherbed could be seen. A little dog barked.
On the day of the young couple’s arrival, in the morning, as usual, Princess Marya went into the waiting room at the appointed hour for the morning greeting and fearfully crossed herself and inwardly recited a prayer. Every day she went in and every day she prayed that this daily meeting would go well.
Along with the soldier, an infantry officer with a bound cheek came up to the campfire and addressed Tushin, asking him to move the guns a little bit to let his wagon pass. After the company commander, two soldiers ran to the campfire. They fought and cursed terribly, pulling some boot from each other.
Prince Vassily, one leg crossed high up on the other, a snuffbox in his hand, as if moved to the utmost, and as if regretting and laughing at his sentimentality himself, was sitting with a smile of tender emotion on his face. When Princess Marya came in, he quickly brought a pinch of snuff to his nose.
In the spring of 1807, Pierre decided to go back to Petersburg. On the way back he intended to visit all his estates and personally ascertain what of all he had prescribed had been done, and what the situation now was of the people whom God had entrusted to him and whose benefactor he was trying to be.
Boris roomed with another adjutant, the Polish count Zhilinsky. Zhilinsky, a Pole brought up in Paris, was rich, passionately loved the French, and almost every day during their stay in Tilsit, Zhilinsky and Boris gathered French officers from the guards and French headquarters for dinners and lunches.
“I? I? What was I telling you?” Pierre said suddenly, getting up and beginning to pace the room. “I’ve always thought so…This girl is such a treasure, such a…She’s a rare girl…My dear friend, I beg you, don’t be clever, don’t doubt, marry, marry, marry…And I’m sure there’ll be no man happier than you.”
He gave her a cold, angry look and offered her his wrinkled, clean-shaven cheek. The whole expression of his face told her that he had not forgotten their morning conversation, that his decision remained in force, and that it was only owing to the presence of the guests that he did not tell her so now.
“Where to?” Pierre asked himself. “Where can I go now? Not to the club or to pay visits.” All people seemed so pitiful, so poor in comparison with the feeling of tenderness and love he experienced, in comparison with that softened, grateful glance she had given him at the last moment through her tears.
The doctor was silent, raising his eyes and shoulders with a quick movement. Anna Mikhailovna, with exactly the same movement, raised her shoulders and eyes, almost closing them, sighed, and walked away from the doctor towards Pierre. She addressed Pierre with special respectfulness and tender sorrow.
“I think the battle will be lost, and I said so to Count Tolstoy and asked him to convey it to the sovereign. And what do you think he replied? Eh, mon cher g&#233;n&#233;ral, je me m&#234;le de riz et des c&#244;telettes, m&#234;lez-vous des affaires de la guerre. †264 Yes…That was the answer I got!”
Having received this news late in the evening, when he was alone in his study, the old prince did not say anything to anyone. As usual, the next day he went for his morning walk; but he was silent with the steward, the gardener, and the architect, and though he looked angry, he said nothing to anyone.
“Ask him to wait,” and there was the sound of a chair being moved. Pierre went up to the door with quick steps and ran face-to-face into the frowning and aged Prince Andrei, who was coming out to him. Pierre embraced him and, raising his spectacles, kissed him on the cheeks and looked at him close up.
The count and Semyon leaped out of the bushes and to their left saw a wolf, which, swaying softly, was moving at a gentle lope to the left of them, towards the same bushes by which they were standing. The angry dogs squealed and, loosed from their leashes, raced towards the wolf past the horses’ legs.
In 1811 there was living in Moscow a French doctor who quickly became the fashion, a man of immense height, handsome, amiable as Frenchmen are, and, as all Moscow said, extraordinarily skillful in his profession—M&#233;tivier. He was received in houses of high society not as a doctor, but as an equal.
“Permission? Permission? You young people are always that way,” said the regimental commander, cooling down a little. “Permission? Say something to you, and you…” The regimental commander paused. “Say something to you, and you…What?” he said, getting irritated again. “Kindly dress your men properly…”
The junker was Rostov. He was holding one arm with the other hand, was pale, and his lower jaw was trembling feverishly. He was seated on Matvevna, the same cannon from which they had unloaded the dead officer. The greatcoat spread under him had blood on it, which stained Rostov’s breeches and hands.
Abandoning that soldier, who was obviously drunk, Rostov stopped the horse of an orderly or groom of some important person and began questioning him. The orderly announced to Rostov that the sovereign had been driven away at top speed in a carriage an hour earlier and that he was dangerously wounded.
Hearing this indifferent voice, Rostov became frightened of what he was doing; the thought of meeting the sovereign at any moment was so seductive and therefore so frightening for him that he was ready to flee, but an attendant, meeting him, opened the door of the officer on duty, and Rostov went in.
In the third category he included the brothers (they were the majority) who saw nothing in Masonry except external form and ritual, and who valued the strict observance of this external form, with no concern for its content and meaning. Such were Willarski and even the grand master of the main lodge.
Soon after Prince Andrei’s departure, Princess Marya wrote to Petersburg from Bald Hills, to her friend Julie Karagin, whom Princess Marya had dreamed, as girls always do, of marrying to her brother, and who at that time was in mourning on the occasion of the death of her brother, killed in Turkey.23
“However,” she wrote, “do not think that my father is ill-disposed towards you. He is an old and ailing man who ought to be excused; but he is kind, magnanimous, and will love the one who will make for his son’s happiness.” Princess Marya also asked Natasha to set a time when she could see her again.
“I’m glad I’ve spoken it all out. Maybe it’s unpleasant for you, you must excuse me,” he said, reassuring Pierre instead of being reassured by him, “but I hope I haven’t offended you. I make it a rule to say everything directly…What shall I tell them, then? Will you come to the Rostovs’ for dinner?”
“That is one of the most remarkable, and for me most unpleasant, of men. That is the minister of foreign affairs, Prince Adam Czartoryski. It’s these people,” Bolkonsky said with a sigh which he could not suppress, as they were leaving the palace, “it’s these people who decide the fates of nations.”
Kutuzov, in an unbuttoned uniform, from which his fat neck, as if released, poured out over the collar, was sitting in a Voltaire armchair, his pudgy old man’s hands placed symmetrically on the two armrests, and was almost asleep. At the sound of Weyrother’s voice, he opened his one eye with effort.
“Vassily Dmitrich, I thank you for the honor,” the countess said in an embarrassed tone, which seemed stern to Denisov, “but my daughter is so young, and I thought that you, as my son’s friend, would have addressed me first. In that case, you would not have brought me to the necessity of a refusal.”
Dimmler began to play. Inaudibly, on tiptoe, Natasha went to the table, picked up the candle, took it out, came back, and quietly sat down in her place. The room was dark, especially on the sofa where they were sitting, but the silver light of the full moon fell on the floor through the big windows.
“Je ne serai pas violent, ne craignez rien,” *387 said Pierre, responding to Anatole’s gesture of fear. “Letters—one,” said Pierre, as if repeating a lesson to himself. “Second,” he went on after a moment’s silence, getting up again and beginning to pace the room, “tomorrow you are to leave Moscow.”
All his life, at every moment, he possessed the faculty of seeing phenomena in the detached finality of each separate instant, in perfectly distinct outline, as we see only on rare occasions, in childhood, or on the crest of an all-renewing happiness, or in the triumph of a great spiritual victory.
At the men’s end of the table, the conversation was becoming more and more animated. The colonel said that the manifesto with the declaration of war had already been published in Petersburg, and that a copy, which he had seen himself, had been delivered today by messenger to the commander in chief.
“Yes, Nikolai himself wrote out these verses, and I wrote down some others; she found them on my desk and said she’d show them to mama, and she also said I was ungrateful, that mama would never let him marry me, and that he’d marry Julie. You see how he’s been with her the whole day…Natasha! Why?…”
“But I am convinced and, basing myself on the last letter with which his highness Archduke Ferdinand has honored me, I suppose that the Austrian troops under the command of so skillful a leader as General Mack, have now gained a decisive victory and are no longer in need of our help,” said Kutuzov.
Just then a whistling was heard in the air; closer, closer, faster and louder, louder and faster, and a cannonball, as if not finishing all it had to say, crashed to the ground with inhuman force not far from the lean-to, throwing up a spray of dirt. The earth seemed to gasp from the terrible blow.
At that same moment little Tushin came running out of the lean-to ahead of everyone else, his pipe askew in his teeth; his kindly, intelligent face was slightly pale. After him the owner of the manly voice came out, a dashing infantry officer, and ran to his company, buttoning himself up as he ran.
“Saints alive! The young count!” he cried, recognizing his young master. “What is this? My dear heart!” And Prokofy, trembling with excitement, rushed for the door to the living room, probably to announce him, but clearly thought again, came back, and pressed himself to the young master’s shoulder.
Natasha first set the tone for the holiday merriment, and that merriment, reflected from one to another, intensified more and more, and reached its highest point at the moment when they all went out into the cold and, talking, calling out to each other, laughing, and shouting, got into the sleighs.
The under-officer, frowning and muttering some abuse, thrust his horse’s breast towards Balashov, took hold of his saber, and shouted rudely at the Russian general, asking him if he was deaf and had not heard what he was told. Balashov gave his name. The under-officer sent a soldier for an officer.
“There’s no point in talking! They’ll tell him, and he’ll marry not only you but anyone else as well; but you’re free to choose…Go to your room, think it over, and in an hour come to me and say in his presence: yes or no. I know you’ll be praying. Well, pray then. Only you’d better think. Now go.”
He felt that it would take only one word from this man for that whole mass (and he himself bound up with it—an insignificant speck) to go through fire and water, to crime, to death, or to the greatest heroism, and therefore he could not but tremble and thrill at the sight of that approaching word.
Two hours after that, Prince Andrei went into his father’s study with quiet steps. The old man already knew everything. He was standing just by the door, and as soon as it opened, the old man silently embraced his son’s neck with his old, tough arms, as in a vise, and burst into sobs like a child.
Only to the old countess, in bed at night, would Natasha have been able to tell everything she thought. She knew that Sonya, with her strict and wholesome view, would either understand nothing or be horrified by her confession. Natasha, alone with herself, tried to resolve what was tormenting her.
Pierre hastily went up to her. He thought that she would give him her hand, as always; but, coming close to him, she stopped, breathing heavily and lowering her arms lifelessly, in exactly the same pose in which she came out to the middle of the room to sing, but with quite a different expression.
“Dearest,” Anna Mikhailovna said in a tender little voice, turning to the porter, “I know Count Kirill Vladimirovich is very ill…that’s why I’ve come…I’m a relation…I won’t trouble anyone, dearest…All I need is to see Prince Vassily Sergeevich: he is staying here, I believe. Announce us, please.”
Prince Vassily looked questioningly, to the point of bewilderment, at her, then at Boris. Boris bowed courteously. Prince Vassily, without responding to the bow, turned to Anna Mikhailovna and replied to her question with a movement of the head and lips signifying the worst hopes for the patient.
“Probably,” said Prince Andrei and headed for the front door; but just then the door slammed and a tall Austrian general, evidently just arrived, in a frock coat, his head bound in a black bandage and the order of Maria Theresa on his neck, quickly entered the waiting room. Prince Andrei stopped.
To Rostov’s renewed questions, Denisov, laughing, said that it seemed somebody else had turned up there, but it was all nonsense, trifles, that he did not even dream of being afraid of any courts, and that if those scoundrels dared to provoke him, he would give them an answer they would remember.
In all, fifty-four hounds were led out under six kennelmen and whippers-in. Besides the gentlemen, there were eight borzoi handlers, around whom roamed more than forty borzois, so that, with the gentlemen’s packs, there were about a hundred and thirty dogs in the field and twenty mounted hunters.
Besides the persons listed, Russians and foreigners (especially the foreigners, who, with the boldness characteristic of people acting in an alien milieu, suggested new, unexpected ideas every day), there were also many secondary persons, who were with the army because their superiors were there.
“‘Dieu me la donne, gare &#224; qui la touche,’”  he said (Bonaparte’s words, spoken as the crown was placed on him). “On dit qu’il a &#233;t&#233; tr&#232;s beau en pronon&#231;ant ces paroles,” ‡50 he added, and repeated the words once more in Italian: “‘Dio mi la dona, guai a chi la tocca.’”
The princess glanced at her watch and noticing that she was already five minutes late for playing the clavichord, went with a frightened face to the sitting room. According to the established order of the day, between noon and two o’clock the prince rested and the princess played the clavichord.
“Rot! Foolishness! Rot, rot, rot!” shouted Prince Nikolai Andreich, frowning, and taking his daughter by the hand, he pulled her to him and did not kiss her, but, leaning his forehead to her forehead, touched it, and squeezed her hand, which he was holding, so hard that she winced and cried out.
Rostov, standing in the front ranks of Kutuzov’s army, which the sovereign rode up to first, had the same feeling that was experienced by every man in that army—a feeling of self-forgetfulness, a proud awareness of strength, and a passionate attraction to him who was the cause of this solemnity.
Rostov noticed something new between Dolokhov and Sonya; but he did not define for himself what these new relations were. “They’re all in love with somebody,” he thought about Sonya and Natasha. But he now felt less at ease with Sonya and Dolokhov, and he began to stay away from home more often.
During the whole week in which she led this life, that feeling grew every day. And the happiness of taking communion, or of “communicating,” as Agrafena Ivanovna used to say, playing joyfully with the word, seemed so great to her that she thought she would never survive till that blessed Sunday.
“No, I haven’t, but here’s what’s come into my head and I wanted to tell you. There’s war now against Napoleon. If it were a war for freedom, I could understand it, I’d be the first to go into military service; but to help England and Austria against the greatest man in the world…is not right.”
“Bonaparte was born lucky. He has excellent soldiers. And the Germans were the first he attacked. You’d have to be a do-nothing not to beat the Germans. Ever since the world began, everybody’s beaten the Germans. And they’ve beaten nobody. Except each other. It was on them he earned his glory.”
By telling his daughter that she was mistaken, that Anatole intended to pay court to Bourienne, the old prince knew he would rouse Princess Marya’s amour propre, and his cause (the wish not to part with his daughter) would be won, and that calmed him down. He called Tikhon and began to undress.
“Why are you shouting so? You’ll frighten them,” said Boris. “I wasn’t expecting you today,” he added. “I sent you a note just yesterday through an acquaintance, Kutuzov’s adjutant—Bolkonsky. I didn’t think he’d deliver it to you so soon…Well, how are you? Already been under fire?” asked Boris.
Berg used the opportunity to ask with particular courtesy whether, as rumor had it, company commanders were now to draw a double allotment for forage. To which Prince Andrei replied with a smile that he was unable to opine about such important government instructions, and Berg laughed joyfully.
“Well, then I’ll tell you now. You know that Sonya’s my friend, such a friend that I’d burn my arm for her. Look here.” She pushed up her muslin sleeve and showed a red mark on her long, thin, and delicate arm, below the shoulder but far above the elbow (where it is covered even by ball gowns).
No laughter was heard in the big maids’ room. In the footmen’s quarters the men all sat silently, ready for something. The caretakers did not sleep and had splinters and candles burning. The old prince paced his study, stepping on his heels, and sent Tikhon to Marya Bogdanovna to ask what news.
Besides being taken up with his estates, besides being generally taken up with reading the most varied books, Prince Andrei was taken up at that time with a critical analysis of our last two unfortunate campaigns and with drawing up a project for change in our military regulations and statutes.
At the end of the cotillion, the old count in his dark blue tailcoat came over to the dancers. He invited Prince Andrei to come and see him, and asked his daughter whether she was having a good time. Natasha did not reply and only smiled a smile which said with reproach: “How can you ask that?”
A vague instinct told Pierre that all these reservations and repeated requests to tell the whole truth  expressed Princess Marya’s ill-will towards her future sister-in-law, that she wished Pierre to disapprove of Prince Andrei’s choice; but Pierre said what he felt rather than what he thought.
“‘Je leur ai montr&#233; le chemin de la gloire,’”  he said after a short silence, again repeating the words of Napoleon, “‘ils n’en ont pas voulu; je leur ai ouvert mes antichambres, ils se sont pr&#233;cipit&#233;s en foule…’ Je ne sais pas &#224; quel point il a eu le droit de le dire.” †55
Kutuzov, whom he had overtaken still in Poland, had received him very affectionately, promised not to forget him, distinguished him from the other adjutants, taken him along to Vienna, charged him with more serious missions. From Vienna Kutuzov wrote to his old comrade, Prince Andrei’s father.
“Le cabinet de Berlin ne peut pas exprimer un sentiment d’alliance,”  Ippolit began, looking around significantly at them all, “sans exprimer…comme dans sa derni&#232;re note…vous comprenez…vous comprenez…et puis si sa Majest&#233; l’Empereur ne d&#233;roge pas au principe de notre alliance…”
Prince Andrei entered a tidy, unostentatious office and saw by the desk a forty-year-old man with a long waist, a long, close-cropped head, and thick wrinkles, with scowling brows over dull, hazel-green eyes and a drooping red nose. Arakcheev turned his head towards him without looking at him.
“I say that,” he went on desperately, “because the Bourbons fled from the revolution, abandoning the people to anarchy; and Napoleon alone was able to understand the revolution, to defeat it, and therefore, for the sake of the common good, he could not stop short at the life of a single man.”
Bagration rode around the ranks that had gone past him and dismounted. He handed the reins to a Cossack, removed and handed over his felt cloak, stretched his legs, and straightened his peaked cap. The head of the French column, with officers in the fore, appeared from the bottom of the hill.
“Never mind, my dear count,” she said, closing her eyes meekly. “And I’ll go to Bezukhov’s myself,” she said. “Young Bezukhov has arrived, and we’ll now get everything from his conservatory. I have to see him anyway. He has sent me a letter from Boris. Thank God, Boris is with the staff now.”
“Seventh,”  said the rhetor, “try by frequent thoughts of death to bring yourself to the point where it no longer seems a fearsome enemy to you, but a friend…who delivers the soul grown weary in the labors of virtue from this calamitous life and leads it to the place of recompense and peace.”
“How can they not only live here, but even laugh?” thought Rostov, still sensing that smell of dead flesh he had picked up in the soldiers’ section, and still seeing around him those envious looks that had followed after him on both sides and the face of the young soldier with rolled-up eyes.
Rostov did not dare to persuade Denisov, though he felt instinctively that the way suggested by Tushin and the other officers was the surest, and though he would have considered himself very happy if he could have been of help to Denisov: he knew Denisov’s inflexible will and righteous ardor.
The day after his visit to Count Arakcheev, Prince Andrei went to a soir&#233;e at Count Kochubey’s. He told the count about his meeting with “Sila Andreich” (as Kochubey called Arakcheev, with that vague mockery of something which Prince Andrei had noticed in the minister of war’s anteroom).
“Come, come, dearest uncle,” Natasha moaned in such an imploring voice as though her life depended on it. The uncle got up, and it was as if there were two men in him—one smiled gravely at the jolly fellow, while the jolly fellow performed a na&#239;ve and precise little caper before dancing.
The longer the emperor stayed in Vilno, the less and less did they prepare for war, grown weary of expecting it. All the strivings of the people who surrounded the sovereign were, it seemed, aimed only at making the sovereign, while passing the time pleasantly, forget about the impending war.
“C’est bien beau ce que vous venez de dire,” *115 Julie, who was sitting next to him, said with a sigh. Sonya trembled all over and blushed to her ears, behind her ears, and down her neck and shoulders, as Nikolai was speaking. Pierre listened to what the colonel said and nodded approvingly.
“Ho, ho, ho! Ha, ha, ha, ha! Hoo, hoo!” Peals of such healthy and merry guffawing came from among the soldiers that it crossed the line and involuntarily infected the French, after which it seemed they ought quickly to unload their guns, blow up their munitions, and all quickly go back home.
“And has papa aged?” she asked. Natasha sat down and, without entering into the conversation between Boris and the countess, silently studied her childhood wooer in the minutest detail. He felt the weight of that persistent and affectionate gaze upon him and glanced at her from time to time.
Kutuzov’s face suddenly softened, and tears welled up in his eyes. He pulled Bagration to him with his left hand, and with his right, which had a ring on it, making an obviously habitual gesture, crossed him and offered him his plump cheek, instead of which Bagration kissed him on the neck.
“Ma ch&#232;re, je vous dirai, que c’est un moment que je n’oublierai jamais, jamais; mais, ma bonne, est-ce que vous ne nous donnerez pas un peu d’esp&#233;rance de toucher ce coeur si bon, si g&#233;n&#233;reux? Dites, que peut-&#234;tre…L’avenir est si grand. Dites: peut-&#234;tre.” *257
“My mother. My mother, my angel, my adored angel, my mother.” And Dolokhov wept, pressing Rostov’s hand. When he had calmed down a little, he explained to Rostov that he lived with his mother, that if his mother saw him dying, she wouldn’t survive it. He begged Rostov to go and prepare her.
“How do you know? No, mama, don’t talk with him. Don’t you dare talk with him. How stupid!” Natasha said in the tone of a person whose property is being taken away. “Well, I’m not going to marry him, so let him come if it’s fun for him and fun for me.” Natasha looked at her mother, smiling.
“Lord, have mercy on us,” she repeated as she was looking for her daughter. Sonya said that Natasha was in her bedroom. Natasha was sitting on her bed, pale, dry-eyed, looking at the icon and whispering something, crossing herself quickly. Seeing her mother, she jumped up and rushed to her.
Rostov was especially struck by the beauty of a small, purebred, red-spotted bitch in Ilagin’s pack, slender, but with muscles of steel, narrow pincers (muzzle), and prominent black eyes. He had heard about the swiftness of Ilagin’s dogs and in this beautiful bitch saw a rival to his Milka.
Of spoons there was only one, sugar was more plentiful than anything else, but they could not all stir at the same time, and so it was decided that she would stir the sugar for each of them in turn. Rostov, receiving his glass, poured some rum into it and asked Marya Genrikhovna to stir it.
“I’m glad that I could give you pleasure, my dearest Anna Mikhailovna,” said Prince Vassily, straightening his jabot and in his gesture and voice displaying here, in Moscow, before the patronized Anna Mikhailovna, far greater importance than in Petersburg, at Annette Scherer’s soir&#233;e.
“That is just why I do not begin, Sire,” Kutuzov said in a ringing voice, as if to forestall the possibility of not being heard, and again something twitched in his face. “I do not begin, Sire, because we are not on parade and not on the Tsaritsyn Field,” he uttered clearly and distinctly.
“My friend,” he heard behind him what sounded like the desperate whisper of Princess Marya. As often happens after long sleeplessness and long anxiety, a groundless fear came over him: it occurred to him that the baby had died. Everything he saw and heard seemed to him to confirm his fear.
To reach Ilagin’s upland, they had to go across the fields. The hunters spread out. The gentry rode together. The uncle, Rostov, and Ilagin kept glancing at each other’s dogs on the sly, trying to keep the others from noticing, and sought worriedly among those dogs for rivals to their own.
“As if it doesn’t!” he said. “It’s happened to me that everything’s fine, everybody’s merry, and it suddenly comes into my head that it’s all tiresome and we all ought to die. Once in the regiment I didn’t go to an outdoor f&#234;te, and there was music there…and I suddenly felt so bored…”
“Il y a quelque chose de si ravissant dans le sourire de la m&#233;lancolie,”  she recited to Boris, word for word, a phrase she had copied from a book. “C’est un rayon de lumi&#232;re dans l’ombre, une nuance entre la douleur et le d&#233;sespoir, qui montre la consolation possible.” *369
“You know, I once drove from Tver on Christmas Eve,” said Anatole with a smile of recollection, addressing Makarin, who tenderly gazed all eyes at Kuragin. “Would you believe, Makarka, it took our breath away, we flew so fast. We drove into a wagon train, leaped right over two wagons. Eh?”
Pierre, arriving first, went to Prince Andrei’s study, being a familiar of the house, and, as was his habit, at once lay down on the sofa, took the first book that caught his eye from the shelf (it was Caesar’s Commentaries ),21 and, leaning on his elbow, began reading it from the middle.
While this Apsheronsky battalion was marching by, ruddy-faced Miloradovich, with no greatcoat, in his uniform tunic and decorations and a hat with enormous plumes, worn at an angle and brim first, galloped ahead hup-two, and with a dashing salute, reined in his horse before the sovereign.
Pierre looked around with tears of joy in his eyes, not knowing how to reply to the congratulations and renewals of acquaintance that surrounded him. He did not recognize any acquaintances; in all these people he saw only brothers, and he burned with impatience to start working with them.
Natasha did not allow her to finish, pulled the countess’s big hand towards her and kissed it on the back, then on the palm, then turned it again and began to kiss it on one knuckle, then in between, then on the next knuckle, murmuring in a whisper: “January, February, March, April, May.”
“It won’t do, dearest. Not everyone will understand your childhood ties, and to see him so close to you may harm you in the eyes of other young men who visit us, and, above all, it torments him for nothing. He might have found a rich match for himself; but now he’s going out of his mind.”
The old count rode home. Natasha and Petya stayed with the hunt, promising to come at once. The hunt went further on, because it was still early. At midday the hounds were loosed into a ravine overgrown with dense, young forest. Nikolai, standing in the stubble, could see all his hunters.
“Me? Wait, wait. Yes, at first I was thinking, here we are driving along and we think we’re driving home, but God knows where we’re going in this darkness, and suddenly we’ll arrive and see that we’re not in Otradnoe, but in a magic kingdom. And then I was also thinking…No, nothing else.”
Mlle George gave the public a stern and gloomy look and began to recite some verses in French in which the talk was of her criminal love for her son.13 In places she raised her voice, in places she whispered, solemnly lifting up her head, in places she paused and gasped, rolling her eyes.
“Of course, if it doesn’t weigh a hundred pounds and pull my neck down…To give you pleasure…” said Prince Andrei, but that same second, noticing the distressed look that came to his sister’s face at this joke, he instantly repented. “I’m very glad, truly, very glad, my friend,” he added.
“There is still much before us, much of everything,” he said, with an old man’s perceptive expression, as though he understood everything that was going on in Bolkonsky’s soul. “If one tenth of his detachment comes back tomorrow, I’ll thank God,” Kutuzov added, as if speaking to himself.
But at that same moment everything became covered with smoke, there was the sound of gunfire nearby, and a na&#239;vely frightened voice two steps from Prince Andrei cried: “Well, brothers, that’s it for us!” And it was as if this voice was a command. At this voice everyone began to run.
“Eh, mon cher vicomte,”  Anna Pavlovna mixed in, “l’Urope”  (for some reason she pronounced it l’Urope,  as if it was some special subtlety of the French language, which she could allow herself when speaking with a Frenchman), “l’Urope ne sera jamais notre alli&#233;e sinc&#232;re.” §301
“Yes, mais ce n’est pas comme vous l’entendez, ”*316 Prince Andrei went on. “I never wished, nor do I wish now, any good to that scoundrel of a protocolist, who stole some boots from the militiamen; I’d even be very pleased to see him hanged, but I pity my father—that is, again, myself.”
“When shall I bring it, Your Excellency?” asked Mitenka. “Allow me to tell you that…However, please don’t worry,” he added, noticing that the count was beginning to breathe heavily and quickly, which was always a sign of incipient wrath. “I almost forgot…Shall I deliver it this minute?”
There was no one in the reception room now except Prince Vassily and the elder princess, who were sitting under the portrait of Catherine having a lively talk. As soon as they saw Pierre with his guide, they fell silent. The princess hid something, as it seemed to Pierre, and whispered:
In the front hall, Denisov, crouching on the threshold with his pipe, sat facing the sergeant major, who was reporting something. Seeing Rostov, Denisov winced and pointed over his shoulder with his thumb to the room where Telyanin was sitting, winced again, and shuddered with loathing.
“This morning Count Lichtenfels was here,” Bilibin went on, “and he showed me a letter which described in detail the parade of the French in Vienna. Le prince Murat et tout le tremblement… ‡195 You see that your victory doesn’t bring much joy and that you can’t be received as a savior…”
“Look, look,” one soldier said to his comrade, pointing to a Russian musketeer who had gone up to the line along with an officer and was speaking rapidly and heatedly with a French grenadier. “See how clever he patters away. Even the Khrenchman can’t keep up with him. Now you, Sidorov…”
On the third day of Christmas, Nikolai dined at home, which had rarely happened with him recently. This was an official farewell dinner, because he and Denisov would be leaving for their regiment after Epiphany.18 There were some twenty guests at dinner, Dolokhov and Denisov among them.
“Well, Sonya,” she said, and went out to the very middle of the reception room, where, in her opinion, the resonance was best. Raising her head, lowering her lifelessly hanging arms as dancers do, Natasha made a few energetic steps from heel to toe in the middle of the room and stopped.
“As soon as we have a certain number of worthy people in every state, each of them will in turn form two more, and they will all be closely united with each other—then everything will be possible for the order, which has already secretly succeeded in doing much for the good of mankind.”
And if being in the room like that seemed improper and burdensome to Danilo, having any sort of dealings with a young lady seemed simply impossible to him. He lowered his eyes and hurried out, as if it had nothing to do with him, trying not to injure the young lady somehow accidentally.
“Like this,” said Dolokhov. “And then like this,” he said and raised the collar around her head, leaving it slightly open only in front of her face. “And then like this, see?” and he moved Anatole’s face to the opening in the collar, from which Matryosha’s brilliant smile could be seen.
“And who do you think you  are?” the officer addressed him with drunken rage. “Who do you think you  are? Are you ” (he especially emphasized the word you ) “a superior officer, or what? I’m the superior here, not you.  And you, back!” he repeated, “or I’ll flatten you like a pancake.”
Pierre was sincere in answering affirmatively Anna Pavlovna’s question about the artfulness of H&#233;l&#232;ne’s behavior. If he ever thought about H&#233;l&#232;ne, he thought precisely about her beauty and that extraordinary, calm ability of hers to be silently dignified in society.
The wagons that were driven up to the hussars had been intended for an infantry regiment, but learning from Lavrushka that the transport was unescorted, Denisov and his hussars took it by force. The soldiers were given biscuits in plenty, and they even shared them with other squadrons.
“Halloo!” came the long-drawn cry of one of the borzoi men, who had stopped. He was standing on a low knoll amidst the stubble with his whip raised, and once more called out: “Hallo-o-o!” (This sound and the raised whip signified that he had spotted a hare in its form in front of him.)
“I do not want and have never wanted war,” he said, “but I was forced into it. Even now ” (he emphasized this word) “I am prepared to accept all the explanations you can give me.” And he began to lay out, clearly and briefly, the reasons for his displeasure with the Russian government.
The introduction to his speech was made, obviously, with the aim of bringing out the advantages of his position and showing that, in spite of that, he had accepted the opening of negotiations. But he now began to speak, and the more he spoke, the less able he was to control his speech.
The emperor was very cheerful after his promenade on horseback in Vilno, where crowds of rapturous people met him and followed him. In all the windows of the streets he rode down, carpets, banners, and his monogram were put out, and Polish ladies greeted him waving their handkerchiefs.
“Vous savez, mon mari m’abandonne,”  she went on in the same tone, turning to a general, “il va se faire tuer. Dites moi, pourquoi cette vilaine guerre?” #31 she said to Prince Vassily and, not waiting for an answer, turned to Prince Vassily’s daughter, the beautiful H&#233;l&#232;ne.
“I am not ‘dear man’ to you, Mister Staff Officer, and you did not tell me to set feuer  to the bridge! I know the serfiss, and I am habituated to strictly fulfilling orders. You said the bridge vas to be set on feuer,  but who vould set it on feuer  I cannot know by the Holy Spirit…”
“Ah, dear prince, there’s no guest more welcome,” said Bilibin, coming out to meet Prince Andrei. “Franz, take the prince’s things to my bedroom!” he turned to the servant who accompanied Bolkonsky. “What, are you a herald of victory? Excellent. And I’m sitting here sick, as you see.”
“But tell them, finally, to form into battalions and go around the village,” Kutuzov said angrily to a general who rode up. “Don’t you understand, Your Excellency, my dear sir, that to stretch out in a defile through village streets is impossible when we’re marching against an enemy?”
The nanny Savishna, holding her knitting, was telling in a low voice, herself not hearing or understanding the words, the story she had told a hundred times, about how the late princess had given birth to Princess Marya in Kishinev, with a Moldavian peasant woman instead of a midwife.
“If you please, Your Excellency, Petrusha has come with papers,” said one of the maids who assisted the nanny, addressing Prince Andrei, who was sitting on a child’s little chair, frowning, his hands trembling, pouring drops of medicine from a vial into a glass half filled with water.
“No. All I say is that what convinces one of the necessity of a future life is not arguments, but when one goes through life hand in hand with a person, and suddenly that person disappears there  into nowhere,  and you yourself stop before that abyss and look into it. And I did look…”
Nikolai, his groom, the uncle, and his hunter all rode round and round the beast, hallooing, shouting, preparing to dismount at any moment, when the wolf sat on his haunches, and leaping forward each time the wolf shook himself and made a move towards the timber, which would save him.
Count Turenne led him into a large reception room, in which sat many generals, gentlemen-in-waiting, and Polish dignitaries, many of whom Balashov had seen at the court of the Russian emperor. Duroc said that the emperor Napoleon would receive the Russian general before his promenade.
“Your Excellency, here are two trophies,” said Dolokhov, pointing to the French sword and pouch. “I captured an officer. I stopped the company.” Dolokhov was breathing heavily from fatigue; he spoke with pauses. “The whole company can testify. I ask you to remember, Your Excellency!”
“I’ll tell you straight out,” said Prince Vassily, in the tone of a cunning man convinced that it is unnecessary to use cunning in view of his interlocutor’s perceptiveness. “You see through people. Anatole is no genius, but he’s an honest, good lad, an excellent son, and one of us.”
After being relieved from the picket line, Rostov had managed to sleep for a few hours before morning, and he felt cheerful, bold, resolute, with that suppleness of movement, assurance of his good luck, and in that state of mind in which everything seems easy, cheerful, and possible.
Princess Marya had long ago abandoned her book: she was sitting silently, her luminous eyes fixed on her nanny’s wrinkled face, familiar to her in the smallest detail: on the lock of gray hair that strayed from under her kerchief, at the little pouch of skin that hung under her chin.
“How can they be displeased with anything,” thought Natasha. “Especially such a nice man as this Bezukhov?” In Natasha’s eyes, all who were at the ball were equally kind, nice, wonderful people, and loved each other: no one could offend anyone, and therefore they should all be happy.
“Sire,”  replied Balashov, “l’Empereur mon ma&#238;tre ne d&#233;sire point la guerre, et comme Votre Majest&#233; le voit,” #401 said Balashov, using Votre Majest&#233;  at every turn, with inevitably affected frequency, addressing the person for whom this title was still a novelty.
It was obvious that Balashov’s person did not interest him in the least. It was clear that only what went on in his  soul was of interest to him. Everything that was outside him had no meaning for him, because everything in the world, as it seemed to him, depended only upon his will.
The princess pondered, smiled pensively (at which her face, lit up by her luminous eyes, was completely transformed) and, suddenly getting up, went with her heavy step to the desk. She took out some paper, and her hand quickly began moving across it. This is what she wrote in reply:
He did not find Prince Andrei in Olm&#252;tz that day. But the sight of Olm&#252;tz, where the headquarters and the diplomatic corps were stationed and both emperors lived with their suites of courtiers and attendants, increased still more his desire to belong to that supreme world.
Just before dinner, Count Ilya Andreich introduced his son to the prince. Bagration, recognizing him, spoke a few incoherent, awkward words, like all the words he spoke that day. While Bagration was talking with his son, Count Ilya Andreich looked everyone over joyfully and proudly.
He covered the girls’ albums with verses and music, and, without taking leave of any of his acquaintances, having finally sent off the entire forty-three thousand and received Dolokhov’s receipt, left at the end of November to catch up with his regiment, which was already in Poland.
Anna Mikhailovna, who had visited the Rostovs less often of late, also behaved with some special dignity and each time spoke rapturously and gratefully of her son’s merits and of the brilliant career he had entered upon. When the Rostovs came to Petersburg, Boris came to visit them.
“I’ll come to one place and pray; before I have time to get used to it and love it, I’ll go on. And I’ll keep going until my legs give out, and I lie down and die somewhere, and come finally to that eternal, quiet haven, where there is no sorrow or sighing!…” thought Princess Marya.
“Petya! Petka!” she cried to him. “Give me a ride dowstairs.” Petya ran over and offered his back. She jumped on it, put her arms around his neck, and he went skipping about with her. “No, never mind…the island of Madagascar,” she said and, jumping off his back, she went downstairs.
“Yes,” Pierre went on with a smile, “and this young man now behaves himself in such a way that, wherever there’s a rich bride, he’s there, too. I can read him like a book. He’s undecided now whom to attack: you or Mlle Julie Karagin. Il est tr&#232;s assidu aupr&#232;s d’elle. ”*363
“Nikolenka’s leaving in a week, his…papers…are ready…he told me himself…But all the same I wouldn’t be crying” (she held up the paper she had in her hand: it was verses written by Nikolai) “…all the same I wouldn’t be crying, but you can’t…nobody can understand…what a soul he has.”
“With that I must observe, Your Excellency,” he went on, remembering Dolokhov’s conversation with Kutuzov and his own last encounter with the demoted soldier, “that the demoted private Dolokhov, before my eyes, took a French officer prisoner and particularly distinguished himself.”
In the bottom, where the action began, the fog was still thick; up above it had cleared, but nothing of what was happening ahead could be seen. Whether all the enemy forces were six miles away from us, as we supposed, or were there in that fog, no one knew until past eight o’clock.
“Yes, we should ride over…together, shall we?” Nikolai replied, looking at Yerza and at his uncle’s red Rugai, two rivals with whom he had never yet had his dogs compete. “And what if they pull my Milka off its ears?” he thought, heading for the hare alongside his uncle and Ilagin.
“You see, friend,” he said, “we’re asleep until we love. We’re children of dust…but fall in love—and you’re God, you’re pure as on the first day of creation…Who’s that now? Send him to the devil. No time!” he shouted to Lavrushka, who came up to him without the slightest timidity.
“But it was especially nice,” one said, telling about a fellow diplomat’s failure, “it was especially nice that the chancellor told him straight out that his appointment to London was a promotion and that he should look at it as such. Can you picture his face when he heard that?…”
Rostov was not listening to the soldier. He looked at the snowflakes dancing above the fire and remembered the Russian winter with a warm, bright house, a fluffy fur coat, swift sleighs, a healthy body, and all the love and care of a family. “And why did I come here?” he wondered.
The two generals and the adjutants began snatching at the field glass, pulling it away from each other. All their faces suddenly changed, and on all of them horror appeared. The French were supposed to be a mile and a half from us, and they suddenly turned up right in front of us.
Some twenty men crowded around the table at which Dolokhov sat between two candles. On the table lay gold and banknotes, and Dolokhov kept the bank. Nikolai had not seen Dolokhov since his proposal and Sonya’s refusal, and he felt embarrassed at the thought of how they would meet.
“No, not for anything, I’ll do it, and you go and listen at the door.” And Natasha ran across the drawing room to the reception room, where Denisov was sitting on the same chair at the clavichord, covering his face with his hands. At the sound of her light footsteps, he jumped up.
In 1809 Count Ilya Andreich was living in Otradnoe in the same way as before, that is, receiving almost the entire province, with hunts, theatricals, dinners, and musicians. He was glad to see Prince Andrei, as he was to see any new guest, and almost forced him to spend the night.
He nodded in response to Balashov’s low and respectful bow and, going up to him, began speaking at once, like a man who values every minute of his time and who does not condescend to prepare his speeches, but is certain that he will always speak well and say what needs to be said.
“It’s not my fault that the conversation started in front of other officers. Maybe I shouldn’t have spoken in front of them, but I’m no diplomat. I joined the hussars because I thought there was no need for subtleties here, but he calls me a liar…so let him give me satisfaction…”
Tushin appeared in the doorway, timidly making his way from behind the generals’ backs. Going around the generals in the crowded cottage, embarrassed as usual at the sight of his superiors, Tushin did not see the staff of the standard and stumbled over it. Several voices laughed.
“No, really, ma bonne amie,  this dress won’t do,” Liza said, looking sideways at the princess from a distance, “have them bring the maroon one you’ve got there! Really! Why, this may just be the deciding of your fate in life. And this is too light, it won’t do, no, it won’t do!”
The horsemen who had ridden up were Napoleon accompanied by two adjutants. Bonaparte, riding over the battlefield, had given final orders about the reinforcement of the batteries firing at the dam of Augesd and was looking at the dead and wounded who were left on the battlefield.
In the adjoining room, sabers, bags, pouches, open suitcases, dirty boots lay about. Two pairs of polished boots with spurs had just been put near the wall. The servants brought washbasins and hot water for shaving, and brushed their clothes. There was a smell of tobacco and men.
“N-no,” Dolokhov said through his teeth, “no, it’s not over,” and, taking several more dipping, hobbling steps to the sword, he fell on the snow beside it. His left hand was bloody; he wiped it on his coat and propped himself up with it. His face was pale, frowning, and trembled.
The day after her talk with her mother, Natasha waited the whole day for Bolkonsky, but he did not come. On the next day and the third it was the same. Pierre also did not come, and Natasha, not knowing that Prince Andrei had gone to see his father, could not explain his absence.
And there was so much seriousness and suffering in her voice that the birds’ warbling immediately ceased. They looked at her big, beautiful eyes, filled with tears and thought, looking at them clearly and pleadingly, and understood that to insist would be useless and even cruel.
“I don’t understand,” said Pierre, fearfully sensing doubt arising in him. He feared the vagueness and weakness of his interlocutor’s arguments, he feared not believing him. “I don’t understand,” he said, “how is it that human reason cannot apprehend the knowledge you speak of?”
Rostov fearfully began to justify himself, but seeing the general’s good-naturedly joking face, led him aside and in an agitated voice told him the whole affair, begging the general to intercede for Denisov, whom he knew. The general listened to Rostov, shaking his head gravely.
The only thing now was Natasha’s skirt, which was too long. Two maids were taking it up, hurriedly biting off the thread. A third, holding pins in her lips and between her teeth, kept running from the countess to Sonya; a fourth held the whole gauze dress on her high-raised arm.
Sonya walked wrapped in her fur coat. She was two steps away before she saw him; she also saw him not as she had known him and had always been a little afraid of him. He was in a woman’s dress, with tousled hair and a happy smile that was new for Sonya. Sonya quickly ran to him.
Boris was the first to learn the news of French troops crossing the Niemen and thanks to that had the chance to show certain important persons that much of what was concealed from others was known to him, and thereby had the chance to rise higher in the opinion of those persons.
The beautiful Vera, who had such an irritating, unpleasant effect on everyone, smiled and, apparently untouched by what had been said to her, went up to the mirror and straightened her scarf and hair. Looking at her beautiful face, she appeared to become even colder and calmer.
“Well, now, Mikhail Ivanovich, things are going badly for our friend Buonaparte. Prince Andrei” (he always referred to his son in the third person like this) “has just been telling me what forces are being prepared against him! But you and I always considered him an empty man.”
“Boonapart stationed there! Lies, you fool! What do you know! It’s the Prussky’s up in arms now. The Austriak’s pacifying him. Soon as they make peace, the war with Boonapart will open up. And he says Boonapart’s in Brunovo! It’s plain you’re a fool, no point listening to you.”
“No, Sonya, do you remember him so as to remember everything, remember really well,” said Natasha, with an assiduous gesture, evidently wishing to give her words the most serious meaning. “I remember Nikolenka, too, I do,” she said. “But not Boris. I don’t remember him at all.”
“Ah, how good, excellent!” she added after every word. Rostov felt how his face and soul expanded under the influence of these hot rays of Natasha’s love, for the first time in a year and a half, into that childish and pure smile which he had not once smiled since he left home.
“But they’re the same as myself, they’re not others,” said Prince Andrei, “and others, one’s ‘neighbors,’ le prochain,  as you and Princess Marya call them, are the chief source of error and evil. Le prochain —that’s those Kievan peasants of yours, to whom you want to do good.”
“Danilo!” said Nikolai, timidly sensing that, at the sight of this hunting weather, these dogs, and his hunter, he was already being seized by that irresistible hunting feeling in which a man forgets all his former intentions, like a lovesick man in the presence of his beloved.
“Everybody take a glass; you, too, Balaga. Well, comrades, friends of my youth, we’ve caroused, lived, caroused. Eh? When will we see each other again? I’m going abroad. We’ve lived—farewell, lads. To your health! Hurrah!…” he said, drank his glass, and smashed it on the floor.
Over dinner the talk turned to the war, the approach of which was becoming obvious. Prince Andrei talked incessantly and argued now with his father, now with the Swiss tutor Dessales, and seemed more animated than usual—an animation the moral cause of which Pierre knew so well.
This letter had not yet been given to the sovereign when Barclay told Bolkonsky at dinner that the sovereign would like to see Prince Andrei in person, in order to question him about Turkey, and that Prince Andrei was to go to Bennigsen’s quarters at six o’clock in the evening.
Prince Andrei inclined his head to indicate that he had understood from the first word not only what had been said, but also what Kutuzov had wished to tell him. He gathered up the papers and, making a general bow, stepping softly over the carpet, went out to the waiting room.
“Very much known, Your Excellency,” the colonel suddenly cried, starting his horse and turning a reddish purple. “Be so kind please to go to the front, and you vill see that this position is good f&#252;r  nothing. I do not vant to destroy my regiment f&#252;r  your pleasure.”
His plate did not seem clean to him; he pointed to a spot and flung it aside. Tikhon caught it and handed it to the butler. The little princess was not unwell; but her fear of the prince was so insuperable that, on learning that he was ill-humored, she decided not to come out.
“Why did they write, why did Liza tell me about it all? It just can’t be!” she kept saying to herself, looking in the mirror. “How will I come out to the drawing room? Even if I liked him, I couldn’t be myself with him now.” The mere thought of her father’s gaze terrified her.
“The highest wisdom and truth is like the most pure liquid, which we want to receive into ourselves,” he said. “Can I receive this pure liquid in an impure vessel and then judge its purity? Only by purifying myself inwardly can I keep the liquid I receive pure to some degree.”
Prince Andrei saw clearly that the old man hoped that either his feeling or his future bride’s would not endure the test of a year, or that he, the old prince, would die himself before then, and decided to do his father’s will: to propose and to put off the wedding for a year.
With the firm intention of settling his affairs in the regiment, resigning from the service, coming home and marrying Sonya, Nikolai, sad and serious, in discord with his family, but, as it seemed to him, passionately in love, left for his regiment at the beginning of January.
“Well, well, all right!” said the old count. “He keeps getting heated up. It’s this Bonaparte who’s turned all their heads; they all wonder how it is that from the lieutenants he landed among the emperors. Well, God grant it,” he added, not noticing the guest’s mocking smile.
Prince Vassily was sitting in an armchair, in his casual pose, one leg crossed high up over the other. His cheeks were twitching badly, and, when they slackened, seemed fatter below; but he had the look of a man who was little taken up with the conversation of the two ladies.
“Hurrah! Hurrah! Hurrah!” thundered on all sides, and one regiment after another received the sovereign to the strains of the general march; then “Hurrah!” and the general march, and again “Hurrah!” and “Hurrah!”—which, ever growing and swelling, merged into a deafening roar.
“Oh, undoubtedly,” said Prince Andrei, and suddenly, with unnatural animation, he began joking with Pierre about how he ought to be careful in dealing with his fifty-year-old Moscow cousins, and in the middle of the banter got up and, taking Pierre by the arm, drew him aside.
The old count’s troika, with Dimmler and the other mummers, set off ahead, its runners screeching as if freezing to the snow, its deep-toned bell clanging. The outrunners pressed themselves to the shafts and sank deeply, churning up the snow, compact and sparkling like sugar.
Outside there was the same immobile cold, the same moon, only it was still brighter. The light was so strong and there were so many stars on the snow, that one did not want to look at the sky, and the real stars went unnoticed. The sky was black and dull, the earth was merry.
“You can think what you like! I know you’re the same as mon p&#232;re.  Think what you like, but do it for me. Do it, please! Father’s father, our grandfather, wore it through all the wars…” She still would not take what she was holding out of the reticule. “So promise me?…”
Natasha looked at Sonya with astonished, curious eyes and said nothing. She felt that what Sonya had said was true, that there was such love as Sonya was talking about; but Natasha had never experienced anything like that. She believed it could be, but did not understand it.
Among the letters from his family there was also a letter of recommendation to Prince Bagration, which the old countess had obtained through acquaintances, on the advice of Anna Mikhailovna, and sent on to her son, asking him to take it to its destination and make use of it.
By the faint light, to which Pierre’s eyes, however, had become accustomed, a short man came in. Evidently having come from light into darkness, the man stopped; then he moved with cautious steps towards the table and placed on it his small hands covered with leather gloves.
“Why have you come here?” asked the man, turning in the direction of Pierre, who had made a slight rustle. “Why have you, who do not believe in the truths of the light and do not see the light, why have you come here, what do you want from us? Wisdom, virtue, enlightenment?”
“An institution supportive of this honor, the source of competition, is an institution like the L&#233;gion d’honneur  of the great emperor Napoleon, which is not detrimental, but contributes to the success of the service, and not the privilege of rank or position at court.”
To smooth over his hunter’s offense, Ilagin insistently invited Rostov to come to his upland, which was less than a mile away, which he kept for himself, and which, according to him, was all strewn with hares. Nikolai accepted, and the hunt, having doubled in size, moved on.
“Have you been here long, Countess?” he said. “I’ll come, I’ll come and kiss your hand. I’m here on business, and I’ve brought my girls along. They say Semyonova is an incomparable performer,” said Ilya Andreich. “Count Pyotr Kirillovich never used to forget us. Is he here?”
Despite the fact that she had formerly been vexed with Natasha, in Petersburg, for having won Boris away from her, she did not think of that now, and in her own way wholeheartedly wished Natasha well. As she was leaving the Rostovs’, she called her prot&#233;g&#233;e  aside.
Another hussar also rushed to the horse, but Bondarenko had already thrown the reins over the horse’s head. One could see that the junker gave good tips and it was profitable to be of service to him. Rostov stroked the horse’s neck, then his croup, and stopped on the porch.
“Well, well, I’m joking, I’m joking,” he said. “Remember one thing, Princess: I hold to the rule that a girl has the full right to choose. And I give you freedom. Remember one thing: the happiness of your life depends on your decision. There’s no point in talking about me.”
“Il est tr&#232;s mauvais, votre jeu de mots, tr&#232;s spirituel, mais injuste,”  said Anna Pavlovna, shaking her shriveled finger. “Nous ne faisons pas la guerre pour le Roi de Prusse, mais pour les bons principes. Ah, le m&#233;chant, ce prince Hyppolite!” §306 she said.
And, patting Berg on the shoulder, he got up, wishing to end the conversation. But Berg, smiling pleasantly, explained that unless he knew for certain what Vera’s dowry would be, and received at least part of what was allotted her in advance, he would be forced to renounce.
“Fool!” she shouted at her brother, ran to a chair, fell on it, and burst into such sobbing that she could not stop for a long time. “It’s nothing, mama, really, it’s nothing—Petya just startled me,” she said, trying to smile, but her tears still flowed and sobs choked her.
Seeing the Russian general, he threw back his head with its curled, shoulder-length hair in a kingly manner and gave the French colonel a questioning glance. The colonel deferentially conveyed to his majesty the meaning of Balashov, whose family name he could not pronounce.
When she said this to him, he made no reply, but only bowed and once more showed everyone his smile, which said nothing except perhaps this: “Opinions are opinions, but you see what a good and nice fellow I am.” And everyone, including Anna Pavlovna, involuntarily felt it.
“Ah! Rostov! Greetings, greetings!” he shouted, in the same voice he used in the regiment; but Rostov noticed sadly that, behind this habitual casualness and liveliness, some new, bad, hidden feeling showed in the expression of Denisov’s face, in his intonations and words.
“Me?” said Nikolai, trying to recall. “You see, first I was thinking that Rugai, the red dog, resembles uncle, and that if he were a man, he would always keep uncle with him, if not for the chase, then for his tunefulness. How tuneful uncle is! Isn’t it so? Well, and you?”
“No,” he said, growing more and more inspired, “Napoleon is great, because he stood above the revolution, put an end to its abuses, and kept all that was good—the equality of citizens and freedom of speech and of the press—and that is the only reason why he gained power.”
“Hm!…If you want to kill him, to kill him outright, you may see him. Olga, go and see whether uncle’s bouillon is ready, it’s soon time,” she added, thereby showing Pierre that they were busy, and busy comforting his father, while he was obviously only busy upsetting him.
“Ma bonne H&#233;l&#232;ne, il faut que vous soyez charitable pour ma pauvre tante, qui a une adoration pour vous. Allez lui tenir companie pour dix minutes. †227 And so that it won’t be too boring for you, here you have the dear count, who will not refuse to follow you.”
“I must inevitably cross it, but I can’t, I can’t,” thought Pierre, and again he began talking about unrelated things, about Sergei Kuzmich, asking what the anecdote was, because he had not heard it well. H&#233;l&#232;ne replied with a smile that she did not know either.
Berg put on the cleanest of frock coats, with not a spot or speck on it, fluffed up his whiskers in front of the mirror, as Alexander Pavlovich wore them, and, assuring himself from Rostov’s glance that his frock coat had been noticed, left the room with a pleasant smile.
“Hallooloo,” Rostov said in a whisper, protruding his lips. The dogs, jingling the metal rings of their collars, jumped up, cocking their ears. Karai finished scratching his haunch and stood up, cocking his ears and slightly wagging his tail, from which tufts of fur hung.
Carousers, those male Magdalenes, have a hidden sense of awareness of their innocence, just as female Magdalenes have, based on the same hope of forgiveness. “Everything will be forgiven her, for she loved much; and everything will be forgiven him, for he had much fun.”11
Sonya began to watch her friend still more attentively, and noticed that all through dinner and in the evening, Natasha was in a strange and unnatural state (responded beside the point to questions put to her, began phrases and did not finish them, laughed at everything).
“Column, form up for the attack!” The infantry ahead of them doubled up their platoons to let the cavalry pass by. The uhlans set off, pennants flying on their lances, and trotted downhill towards the French cavalry, which had appeared at the foot of the hill to the left.
The staff was quartered two miles from Salzeneck. Without stopping at home, Rostov took his horse and rode to the staff. In the village occupied by the staff there was a tavern frequented by the officers. Rostov rode to the tavern; near the porch he saw Telyanin’s horse.
After nine in the evening, Weyrother moved with his plans to Kutuzov’s quarters, where a council of war was called. All the leaders of columns were summoned to the commander in chief, and, apart from Bagration, who refused to come, they all arrived at the appointed time.
He was riding almost along the front line. Several horsemen came riding in his direction. They were our life uhlans, who were returning from an attack in disorderly ranks. Rostov passed by them, involuntarily noticing that one of them was covered with blood, and rode on.
“Yes, she’s all right. Good speed,” Nikolai replied. “If only there was a seasoned hare running through the field, I’d show you what kind of dog she is!” he thought. And turning to his groom, he said he would give a rouble to the hunter who could spot a hare in its form.
“I’m so glad, so glad! I was getting angry with you. I didn’t tell you, but you behaved badly towards her. She’s such a heart, Nicolas, I’m so glad! I can be nasty, but I was ashamed to be happy alone, without Sonya,” Natasha went on. “Now I’m so glad! Well, run to her.”
“My wife,” Prince Andrei went on, “is a wonderful woman. She’s one of those rare women with whom one can be at ease regarding one’s own honor; but, my God, what wouldn’t I give now not to be married! You’re the first and only one I’m saying this to, because I love you.”
As he was saying this, he got up, went over to his sister, and, bending down, kissed her on the forehead. His fine eyes shone with an intelligent and kindly, unhabitual light, but he was looking not at his sister but into the darkness of the open doorway, over her head.
With great effort he reached his horse. Shouting constantly, he began to move ahead. The soldiers pressed back to let him pass, then pressed together again so hard that his leg was squashed, and those closest to him were not to blame, for they were pressed still harder.
“My friend, what have you done in Moscow? Why did you quarrel with Lelya, mon cher?  You are mistaken,” said Prince Vassily as he came in. “I’ve found out everything and can tell you for certain that H&#233;l&#232;ne is as innocent before you as Christ before the Jews.”
In the room stood a baby’s crib, two trunks, two armchairs, a table, and a child’s table with the little chair on which Prince Andrei was sitting. The curtains were drawn, and a candle burned on the table, screened by a bound music book to shield the bed from the light.
Warmed by the spring sun, he sat in his open carriage, looking at the first grass, the first birch leaves, and the first billows of white spring clouds racing across the bright blue sky. He was not thinking about anything, but looked around cheerfully and meaninglessly.
“Ayez confiance en sa mis&#233;ricorde!” †131 she said to him and, pointing to a little settee on which he could sit and wait for her, made inaudibly for the door that everyone was looking at, and, following the barely audible noise of that door, disappeared behind it.
“Hold on to my arm, otherwise you’ll drop him,” the frightened whisper of one of the servants reached him, “from below…one more,” voices said, and the heavy breathing and the tread of people’s feet quickened, as if the load they were carrying was beyond their strength.
The halted infantry soldiers, crowding in the trampled mud by the bridge, gazed at the clean, foppish hussars going past them in order, with that special feeling of ill will, alienation, and mockery with which different branches of the military usually meet each other.
“Cependant, mon cher,”  he said, studying his fingernail from a distance and gathering up the skin over his left eye, “malgr&#233; la haute estime que je professe pour le  Orthodox Russian armed forces,8 j’avoue que votre victoire n’est pas des plus victorieuses.” *189
Prince Andrei, without raising his eyes, hastily rode away from the doctor’s wife, who was calling him her savior, and, recalling with disgust the minutest details of this humiliating scene, rode on towards the village where he had been told the commander in chief was.
“One thing I don’t understand,” the old man went on. “Who’s going to work the land if they’re freed? Writing laws is easy, but governing is difficult. It’s the same thing I ask you now, Count: who will be the heads of departments if everybody has to take examinations?”
Nikolai expressed his displeasure at the wedding being put off for a year; but Natasha fiercely attacked her brother, proving to him that it could not be otherwise, that it would be bad to enter the family against the father’s will, that she herself wanted it that way.
Half an hour later an old lady in a farthingale appeared in the room among the other mummers—this was Nikolai. The Turkish woman was Petya. A clown—this was Dimmler; the hussar was Natasha, and the Circassian was Sonya, with mustache and eyebrows drawn with burnt cork.
“And let him know that I will do it!” said Napoleon, getting up and shoving his cup away with his hand. “I’ll throw all his relatives out of Germany, all these W&#252;rttembergs, Badens, Weimars…19 Yes, I’ll throw them out. Let him prepare a refuge for them in Russia!”
“I know, I know,” said Prince Vassily in his monotone voice. “Je n’ai jamais pu concevoir comment Natalie s’est d&#233;cid&#233;e &#224; &#233;pouser cet ours mal-l&#233;ch&#233;! Un personnage compl&#232;tement stupide et ridicule. Et joueur &#224; ce qu’on dit.” *98
“Nothing, it’s all the same; I have only come to have a talk with you, Catiche, about business,” said the prince, sitting with an air of fatigue in the armchair from which she had gotten up. “How warm you keep it, though,” he said. “Well, sit down here, causons. ”*119
The French managed to fire three rounds of canister shot before the hussars got back to the horse-tenders. Two of the rounds were poorly aimed and all the shot went overhead, but the last round landed in the middle of a bunch of hussars and brought down three of them.
L’aide-de-camp de l’Empereur de Russie est un…Les officiers ne sont rien quand ils n’ont pas de pouvoirs: celui-ci n’en avait point…Les Autrichiens se sont laiss&#233; jouer pour le passage du pont de Vienne, vous vous laissez jouer par un aide-de-camp de l’Empereur.
Tushin did not tell him that there were no covering troops, though that was the plain truth. He was afraid to let down  another officer that way and silently, with fixed eyes, looked straight into Bagration’s face, as a confused student looks into his examiner’s eyes.
He knew it at that moment as certainly as he would have known it standing at the altar with her. How it would be and when, he did not know; he did not even know whether it would be good (he even felt that it was not good for some reason), but he knew that it would be.
A solemn session of the lodge of the second degree was convened, at which Pierre promised to tell what he had to convey to the Petersburg brothers from the highest leaders of the order. The session was full. After the usual rituals, Pierre got up and began his speech.
“Well, my friends, I’ve thought the whole matter over, and here’s my advice to you,” she began. “Yesterday, as you know, I called on Prince Nikolai; well, sir, and I talked with him…He took a notion to shout. But there’s no out-shouting me! I sang it all out for him!”
“You know what?” said Pierre, as if a lucky thought had unexpectedly occurred to him. “Seriously, I’ve been thinking that for a long time. With this life I can’t decide or even consider anything. I have a headache and no money. He invited me tonight, but I won’t go.”
“Ah, mon ami, oubliez les torts qu’on a pu avoir envers vous, pensez que c’est votre p&#232;re…peut-&#234;tre &#224; l’agonie.”  She sighed. “Je vous ai tout de suite aim&#233; comme mon fils. Fiez &#224; moi, Pierre. Je n’oublierais pas vos int&#233;r&#234;ts.” *128
Having drawn even with the infantry guards, he noticed that cannonballs were flying over and around them, not so much because he heard the sound of the cannon, but because he saw uneasiness on the soldiers’ faces, and on the officers’ an unnatural military solemnity.
“What’s with you?” Rostov shouted, looking at him with rapturously spiteful eyes. “Don’t you hear: to the health of the sovereign emperor!” Pierre sighed, rose obediently, drank his glass, and, waiting for everyone to sit down, turned to Rostov with his kindly smile.
Prince Andrei spoke his mind so clearly and distinctly that it was evident he had thought about it more than once, and he spoke eagerly and quickly, like a man who has not spoken for a long time. His gaze became the more animated, the more hopeless his opinions were.
Though some freethinkers smiled when told of Berg’s virtues, it was impossible not to admit that Berg was a good, brave officer, highly regarded by his superiors, and a modest, moral young man with a brilliant career ahead of him and even a solid position in society.
At two o’clock the six chosen persons gathered for dinner. The guests—the well-known Count Rastopchin, Prince Lopukhin with his nephew, General Chatrov, the prince’s old wartime friend, and of the young men Pierre and Boris Drubetskoy—awaited him in the drawing room.
“Mon cher,”  Anna Mikhailovna said to her son, “je sais de bonne source que le prince Basile envoie son fils &#224; Moscou pour lui fair &#233;pouser Julie. *372 I love Julie so much that I would find that a pity. What do you think, my friend?” said Anna Mikhailovna.
“Everything suddenly comes at once,” the count replied. “Rags to be bought, and now there’s also a buyer for the estate and the house. If you could do me the kindness, I’ll choose a little moment, drive over to Maryinskoe for a day, and leave my girls in your hands.”
“But you know, Countess,” he said suddenly, addressing her like an old, long-standing acquaintance, “we’re organizing a costume carousel; you must take part in it: we’ll have great fun. Everybody’s getting together at the Arkharovs’. Please come, won’t you?” he said.
The prince lapsed into indifferent silence. Anna Pavlovna, with her courtly and feminine adroitness and ready tact, wanted both to swat the prince for daring to make such a pronouncement about a person recommended to the empress, and at the same time to comfort him.
Because of the self-assurance with which he spoke, no one could make out whether what he had said was very clever or very stupid. He was wearing a dark green tailcoat, trousers the color of cuisse de nymphe effray&#233;e, §42 as he said himself, stockings and shoes.
By that time in the maids’ quarters not only was everything known about the arrival of the minister and his son, but their external appearance had already been described in detail. Princess Marya sat alone in her room, vainly trying to overcome her inner excitement.
“Oooh!” Kutuzov moaned with an expression of despair and looked around. “Bolkonsky,” he whispered in a voice trembling with awareness of his old man’s strengthlessness. “Bolkonsky,” he whispered, pointing to the disordered battalion and the enemy, “what’s going on?”
“The means are European balance and the droit des gens, ”*43 the abb&#233; was saying. “Let a powerful state like Russia, famous for its barbarism, stand disinterestedly at the head of a union having as its purpose the balance of Europe—and it will save the world!”
“Very well, fifty imperials, that I will drink a whole bottle of rum, without taking it from my lips, drink it sitting outside the window, on this place” (he bent down and indicated the sloping ledge outside the window), “and without holding on to anything…Right?…”
“Boris!” she said to her son and smiled. “I’ll go to the count, my uncle, and meanwhile you go to Pierre, mon ami,  and don’t forget to convey to him the invitation from the Rostovs. They’re inviting him to dinner. He won’t go, I suppose?” she turned to the prince.
But the colonel did not finish everything he wanted to say. A cannonball flew close to him and made him duck and crouch down on his horse. He fell silent and was about to say something more when another cannonball stopped him. He turned his horse and galloped away.
Prince Vassily smiles, and Pierre sees that everyone, everyone is smiling at him and at H&#233;l&#232;ne. “Well, so what if you all know,” Pierre says to himself. “Well, so what? it’s true,” and he smiles his meek, childlike smile, and H&#233;l&#232;ne smiles, too.
“Well, Lelya?” he at once addressed his daughter in that careless tone of habitual tenderness which is adopted by parents who have been affectionate with their children since childhood, but which Prince Vassily only approximated by means of imitating other parents.
Pierre, with a meek smile of pity and regret, his legs and arms spread helplessly, his broad chest exposed, stood before Dolokhov and looked at him sorrowfully. Denisov, Rostov, and Nesvitsky closed their eyes. The shot and Dolokhov’s angry cry came simultaneously.
“Ah, yes,” said Pierre, with an unnatural smile. “I’m very grateful…Where are you coming from?” The traveler’s face was not gentle, but even cold and stern, yet in spite of that, his new acquaintance’s words and face had an irresistibly attractive effect on Pierre.
“I am an admirer of Montesquieu,” said Prince Andrei. “And his thought that ‘le principe des monarchies est l’honneur’ me para&#238;t incontestable. Certains droits et privil&#232;ges de la noblesse me paraissent &#234;tre des moyens de soutenir ce sentiment. ”*339
“Je suis votre  faithful slave, et &#224; vous seule je puis l’avouer.  My children—ce sont les entraves de mon existence. *18 That’s my cross. I explain it that way to myself. Que voulez-vous? …”  He paused, expressing with a gesture his submission to cruel fate.
“Gentlemen, the disposition for tomorrow, for today even (because it’s already past twelve), cannot be changed,” he said. “You have heard it, and we will all do our duty. And there’s nothing more important before a battle…” (he paused) “than a good night’s sleep.”
It was becoming frightening. It was obvious that the affair, having begun so lightly, could no longer be prevented by anything, that it was going on by itself, independently of men’s will, and would be accomplished. Denisov first went to the barrier and announced:
A week later, having said good-bye to his new Mason friends and having left them large sums for alms, Pierre went off to his estates. His new brothers gave him letters to the Masons of Kiev and Odessa and promised to write to him and guide him in his new activity.
“It seems there are lots of scribblers around,” said the old prince. “There in Petersburg they’re writing all the time, not only notes but new laws. My Andryusha wrote a whole volume of laws for Russia there. Nowadays everybody writes!” And he laughed unnaturally.
As soon as the curtain rose, the boxes and parterre all fell silent, and all the men, old and young, in uniforms and tailcoats, all the women, in precious stones on bare bodies, with greedy curiosity turned their attention to the stage. Natasha also began to look.
During this act, Natasha, each time she glanced at the parterre, saw Anatole Kuragin, his arm flung over the back of his seat, looking at her. She was pleased to see that he was so captivated by her, and it never entered her head that there was anything bad in it.
“But why these secrets? Why doesn’t he come to the house?” Sonya kept asking. “Why doesn’t he seek your hand directly? Prince Andrei gave you full freedom, if that’s how it is; but I don’t believe it. Natasha, have you thought what secret reasons  there might be?”
At the porch stood two troikas, held by two fine-looking coachmen. Balaga got up on the first troika and, raising his elbows high, unhurriedly sorted out the reins. Anatole and Dolokhov got in with him. Makarin, Khvostikov, and the valet got into the other troika.
“Natalya!…” said Marya Dmitrievna. “I wish you well. You’re lying there, well, so lie there, I won’t touch you, but you listen…I won’t even speak of how guilty you are. You know it yourself. Well, now your father will come tomorrow, and what am I to tell him? Eh?”
Her tone was querulous now, her little lip rose, giving her face not a joyful but an animalish, squirrel-like expression. She fell silent, as if finding it indecent to speak of her pregnancy in front of Pierre, though that was where the essence of the matter lay.
“Tonight Schubert will be dining with us, a colonel in the Pavlogradsky hussar regiment. He’s been on leave here and is taking him along. What to do?” said the count, shrugging his shoulders and speaking jokingly about a matter that obviously cost him much grief.
“Mais c’est un palais,”  she said to her husband, looking around with the expression of someone paying compliments to the host at a ball. “Allons, vite, vite!…” *154 Looking about, she smiled at Tikhon, and at her husband, and at the servant who accompanied them.
“And I also saw the attack of the Pavlogradsky hussars, Your Excellency,” interrupted Zherkov, looking around uneasily, though he had not seen any hussars that day, but had only heard about them from an infantry officer. “They broke two squares, Your Excellency.”
“Vraiment?” §324 said Pierre, studying the face of Ivanushka curiously and gravely through his spectacles (for which Princess Marya was especially grateful to him). Realizing that they were talking about him, Ivanushka looked around at them all with cunning eyes.
The countess, with a coldness such as her son had never seen, replied to him that he was of age, that Prince Andrei was going to marry without his father’s consent, and that he could do the same, but that she would never recognize this intriguer  as her daughter.
“This is the same room, I’ve been told, in which the emperor Alexander lived. Strange, isn’t it, General?” he said, obviously not doubting that this remark could be anything but pleasing to his interlocutor, as it proved his, Napoleon’s, superiority to Alexander.
His daughter, Princess H&#233;l&#232;ne, lightly holding the folds of her gown, walked between the chairs, and the smile shone still more brightly on her beautiful face. Pierre looked with enraptured, almost frightened eyes at this beauty as she walked past him.
Pierre could not understand for a long time, but when he did, he jumped up from the sofa, seized Boris’s arm from below with his peculiar quickness and awkwardness, and, turning much more red than Boris, began speaking with a mixed feeling of shame and vexation:
Those who were in the dimly lit room talked together in broken whispers, and fell silent each time, turning with eyes full of inquiry and expectation to the door which led to the dying man’s room and which made a faint noise whenever someone went in or came out.
“I know that the will has been written; but I also know that it is not valid, and you seem to consider me a perfect fool, mon cousin, ” said the princess, with that expression with which women speak when they suppose they have said something witty and insulting.
“Well, Mikhailo Mitrich, old boy,” he addressed one of the battalion commanders (the battalion commander, smiling, moved forward; it was clear that both men were happy), “we were hard put to it last night. However, it seems the regiment’s not such a bad one…Eh?”
“If you, my dear sir,” he began in a shrill voice, with a slight trembling of the lower jaw, “wish to be a buffoon,  I cannot prevent you from being one; but I announce to you that the next time you dare  to clown in my presence, I will teach you how to behave.”
The little princess, like an old warhorse hearing the sound of trumpets, was preparing herself, unconsciously and forgetting her condition, for her habitual coquettish gallop, without any second thoughts or struggles, but with na&#239;ve, light-minded merriment.
“Why don’t you wash, it’s not clean,” said Prince Andrei. “On the contrary, one must try to make one’s life as pleasant as possible. I’m alive and it’s not my fault, which means I must somehow go on living the best I can, without bothering anybody, until I die.”
In the month of April, the troops were enlivened by news that the sovereign was coming to the army. Rostov did not manage to get to the review that the sovereign held in Bartenstein: the Pavlogradsky regiment was stationed at outposts far forward of Bartenstein.
The hospital was housed in a stone buidling with a portion of its windows and window frames broken, which stood in a yard with the remains of a dismantled fence. Several soldiers, bandaged, pale, and swollen, were walking about or sitting in the yard in the sun.
“Not that way, not that way, Sonya!” said Natasha, turning her head and putting both hands to her hair, which the maid who was holding it did not have time to let go of. “The bow’s wrong, come here.” Sonya crouched down. Natasha pinned the ribbon on another way.
“Yes,” said the countess, and she gave him her hand and pressed her lips to his forehead with a mixed feeling of alienation and tenderness when he bent over her hand. She wished to love him as a son; but she felt that for her he was an alien and frightening man.
The uncle dismounted by the porch of his small wooden house sunk in a garden, and, looking over his domestics, shouted peremptorily that the superfluous people should take themselves off and everything necessary should be done to receive the guests and the hunt.
When the second act was over, Countess Bezukhov got up, turned to the Rostovs’ box (her bosom was now completely bared), beckoned to the old count with her gloved finger, and, ignoring the people who came into her box, began talking to him with an amiable smile.
Natasha, wasted, with a pale and stern face (not at all shamefaced as Pierre expected her to be), was standing in the middle of the drawing room. When Pierre appeared in the doorway, she became flustered, obviously undecided whether to go to him or wait for him.
“Au moins changez la coiffure,”  said the little princess. “Je vous disais,”  she said with reproach, turning to Mlle Bourienne, “Marie a une de ces figures, auxquelles ce genre de coiffure ne vas pas du tout. Mais du tout, du tout. Changez de gr&#226;ce.” §244
“There are pickets on the hill, Your Excellency, in the same place as this evening,” Rostov reported, bending forward, holding his hand to his visor, and unable to repress a cheerful smile, called up in him by his ride and above all by the whine of the bullets.
Speransky did not shift his eyes from one face to another, as one does involuntarily when entering a large company, and he was in no hurry to speak. He spoke softly, with assurance that he would be heard, and looked only at the person with whom he was speaking.
His life meanwhile went on in the same way, with the same diversions and licentiousness. He liked to dine and drink well, and though he considered it immoral and humiliating, he could not refrain from the amusements of the bachelor companies he participated in.
This reply of Balashov’s, alluding to the recent defeat of the French in Spain,17 was highly appreciated later on, according to Balashov’s account, at the court of the emperor Alexander, but very little appreciated now, at Napoleon’s dinner, and went unnoticed.
Marya Dmitrievna and the countess laughed, and all the guests followed suit. Everyone laughed not at Marya Dmitrievna’s reply, but at the inconceivable boldness and adroitness of this girl, who was both smart and pert enough to treat Marya Dmitrievna that way.
Just then Petya, glimpsing the sabers in the adjoining room, and seizing them with the feeling of rapture which boys experience at the sight of a military older brother, and forgetting that it was improper for his sisters to see undressed men, opened the door.
Princess Marya indeed became embarrassed and covered with red spots when they came to her. In her cozy room, with icon lamps before the icons, a young boy with a long nose and long hair and in a monk’s cassock was sitting on the sofa beside her at the samovar.
Everything had been eaten, and the local people had all fled; those who had stayed were worse than destitute, there was nothing to take from them, and the soldiers, little given to pity, often even gave them the last food they had, instead of taking from them.
“How beautiful! She yields nothing to Marya Antonovna.17 See how the men dangle after her, young and old. Both beautiful and intelligent. They say Prince——has lost his mind over her. But these two here, though they’re not beautiful, are still more surrounded.”
“A real picture! Like the other day when we chased a fox from the Zavarzinsky thicket. The master went hurtling to cut it off from the forest, something fearsome—a thousand-rouble horse, but the rider’s priceless! Yes, a fine fellow like that is hard to find!”
“Mama, darling, it’s not at all because of…my poor, dear heart,” she was saying to her mother, who, feeling herself on the verge of a breakup, looked at her son with horror, but, being stubborn and carried away by the struggle, would not and could not give in.
Having come to Moscow on leave a few days earlier, Boris had wished to be introduced to Prince Nikolai Andreich, and had managed to win his favor to such a degree that the prince had made him an exception among all the young bachelors, whom he did not receive.
Prince Bagration looked at Tushin and, obviously not wishing to show any mistrust of Bolkonsky’s sharp judgment, and at the same time feeling himself unable to believe him fully, inclined his head and told Tushin he could go. Prince Andrei went out after him.
“Non, ce n’est rien, je voulais dire seulement…”  (He intended to repeat a joke that he had heard in Vienna and that he had been trying to put in all evening.) “Je voulais dire seulement que nous avons tort de faire la guerre ‘pour le Roi de Prusse.’” ‡305 12
Prince Andrei turned several times to look at this oak as he drove through the woods, as if he expected something from it. There were flowers and grass beneath the oak as well, but it stood among them in the same way, scowling, motionless, ugly, and stubborn.
“Rugai! Here, here!” he cried. “Rugayushka!” he added, involuntarily expressing by this diminutive his tenderness and the hope he placed in this red dog. Natasha saw and felt the hidden excitement of these two old men and her brother, and was excited herself.
“Hold on now, master,” he said. The troikas flew on still faster side by side, and faster moved the legs of the galloping horses. Nikolai began to pull ahead. Zakhar, without changing the position of his outstretched arms, raised the hand that held the reins.
When an apple ripens and falls—what makes it fall? Is it that it is attracted to the ground, is it that the stem withers, is it that the sun has dried it up, that it has grown heavier, that the wind shakes it, that the boy standing underneath wants to eat it?
“Here in Moscow we’re more taken up with dinners and gossip than with politics,” he said in his calm, mocking tone. “I neither know nor think about any of it. Moscow is taken up with gossip most of all,” he went on. “Now the talk is about you and the count.”
On all sides one could hear the footsteps and talk of the infantry walking, driving, and settling themselves around. The sounds of voices, footsteps, and horses’ hooves treading in the mud, the crackling of firewood far and near merged into one rippling hum.
“Mon cher comte, vous &#234;tes l’un de mes meilleurs &#233;coliers, il faut que vous dansiez,”  said little Iogel, coming over to Nikolai. “Voyez combien de jolies demoiselles.” *289 He turned with the same request to Denisov, who was also his former pupil.
Depuis nos grands succ&#232;s d’Austerlitz vous savez, mon cher Prince, que je ne quitte plus les quartiers g&#233;n&#233;raux. D&#233;cid&#233;ment j’ai pris le go&#251;t de la guerre, et bien m’en a pris. Ce que j’ai vu ces trois mois, est incroyable. *312
“Let’s go to my sister,” said Prince Andrei, returning to Pierre. “I haven’t seen her yet, she’s hiding now and sitting with her people of God. It will serve her right, she’ll get embarrassed, but you’ll see the people of God. C’est curieux, ma parole. ”*317
Count Ilya Andreich, who, though not a hunter at heart, had a firm knowledge of the rules of hunting, rode to the edge of the bushes where he was to stand, straightened out the reins, settled in the saddle, and, feeling himself ready, looked around, smiling.
And, having dismissed Mavrusha, Natasha went through the reception room to the front hall. An old servant and two young ones were playing cards. They broke off their game and stood up when the young lady came in. “What shall I do with them?” thought Natasha.
“You say that withdrawal beyond the Niemen is demanded of me in order to begin negotiations; but in just the same way it was demanded of me two months ago that I withdraw beyond the Oder and the Vistula, and, despite that, you agree to conduct negotiations.”
At the review the next day the sovereign asked Prince Andrei where he would like to serve, and Prince Andrei was forever lost to the world of the court when he did not ask to remain with the person of the sovereign, but asked permission to serve in the army.
“Anyhow, I can’t stand it,” said Ilyin, noticing that Rostov did not like Zdrzhinsky’s conversation. “My socks, and my shirt, and under me it’s all soaked. I’ll go and find some shelter. The rain seems to be letting up.” Ilyin left, and Zdrzhinsky rode away.
“If only there were some women. But here, except for drinking, there’s nothing to do. If only we’d start fighting soon…Hey, who’s there?” he turned to the door, hearing the tread of heavy boots with jingling spurs come to a stop and then a respectful cough.
“Well, then, young man?” he said, sighing and looking into Rostov’s eyes from under his raised eyebrows. Some sort of light, quick as an electric spark, passed from Telyanin’s eyes to the eyes of Rostov and back, and forth and back again, all in an instant.
Weyrother again smiled that same ironic smile, which said that to him  it was ridiculous and strange to meet objections from Russian generals and prove that of which he was not only all too well assured himself, but of which he had assured the two emperors.
Five minutes later, in her rooms, the princess heard something heavy being carried. She peeked out—the servants were for some reason carrying a leather sofa that had been in Prince Andrei’s study. There was something solemn and quiet in the carriers’ faces.
“I helped you, but even so I have to tell you the truth: it’s a dangerous business, and, once you look at it, stupid. So you take her away—good. But are they going to let it stop there? They’ll find out you’re married. You’ll wind up in the criminal court…”
Rostov did not think of what the call for a stretcher meant; he ran on, trying only to be ahead of everyone else; but just by the bridge, not looking under his feet, he got into the slimy, trampled mud, stumbled, and fell on his hands. Others ran past him.
“You don’t know Him, my dear sir, and that is why you are very unhappy. You don’t know Him, but He is here, He is in me, He is in my words, He is in you, and even in that blasphemous talk you have just produced,” the Mason said in a stern, trembling voice.
Before supper Prince Andrei, returning to his father’s study, found the old prince in hot dispute with Pierre. Pierre insisted that a time would come when there would be no more war. The old prince, mockingly, but without getting angry, argued against him.
Natasha looked joyfully at the familiar face of Pierre, that tomfool, as Mme Peronsky had called him, and knew that Pierre was looking for them in the crowd, and for her in particular. Pierre had promised to be at the ball and to introduce partners to her.
“That’s my Mitka the coachman…I bought him a good balalaika, I like it,” said the uncle. It was the uncle’s custom that, when he came back from the hunt, Mitka would play the balalaika in the bachelor hunters’ room. The uncle liked listening to this music.
“And what, if I loved a girl with no fortune, would you really demand, maman,  that I sacrifice my feeling and honor for the sake of money?” he asked his mother, not understanding the cruelty of his question and wishing only to make a show of his nobility.
“Oh, so right! I recently quarreled with mama about it. Mama said she was trying to snare you. How could she say that! I nearly had a fight with mama. And I’ll never let anybody say or think anything bad about her, because there’s nothing but good in her.”
“Yes, indeed, there’s a true wise man!” thought Pierre. “He doesn’t see anything beyond the present moment of pleasure, nothing troubles him—and therefore he’s always cheerful, content, and calm. I’d give anything to be like him!” Pierre thought with envy.
“She was so tired that she fell asleep in my room on the sofa. Ah, Andr&#233;! Quel tr&#233;sor de femme vous avez, ”*170 she said, sitting down on the sofa opposite her brother. “She’s a perfect child, such a dear, merry child. I’ve come to love her so.”
“Give me that letter,” said Kutuzov, turning to Prince Andrei. “Take a look, if you please,” and Kutuzov, with a mocking smile at the corners of his lips, read in German for the Austrian general the following passage from the letter of Archduke Ferdinand:
The regimental commander had so wanted to do that, he had been so sorry that he had had no time to do it, that it seemed to him that all this was exactly so. And perhaps it really was so? As if one could make out in that confusion what was and was not so?
“How shall I tell you,” Natasha replied. “I was in love with Boris, with my teacher, with Denisov, but this is not the same at all. I feel peaceful, firm. I know that there’s no one better than he, and I feel so calm, so good now. Not at all like before…”
“Awaiting orders, Your Excellency, to be dispatched to my new assignment,” replied Boris, showing neither vexation at the prince’s abrupt tone, nor the wish to get into conversation, but so calmly and deferentially that the prince looked at him intently.
“Does it ever happen to you,” Natasha said to her brother, when they had settled in the sitting room, “does it ever happen to you that you feel there’s nothing more—nothing; that everything good has already happened? And it’s not really boring, but sad?”
The silence was rather prolonged. Prince Bagration, probably unwilling to be severe, could not find what to say; the rest did not dare mix into the conversation. Prince Andrei looked at Tushin from under his eyebrows, and his fingers twitched nervously.
Boris listened attentively to what was being said, waiting for his turn, but at the same time he managed to glance several times at his neighbor, the beautiful H&#233;l&#232;ne, who several times met the eyes of the handsome young adjutant with a smile.
“It’s cleverly written, there’s no saying it’s not,” said Tushin. “But that’s not the point, Vassily Dmitrich,” he also turned to Rostov, “a man ought to submit, but Vassily Dmitrich here doesn’t want to. The auditor told you your case was going badly.”
“And how can you judge what would have been better!” he shouted, his face suddenly suffused with blood. “How can you judge the sovereign’s actions, what right have we to discuss it?! We can understand neither the goals nor the actions of the sovereign!”
“All right, all right, with me they’ll be safe. With me it’s like state custody. I’ll take them out wherever necessary, and scold them, and pet them,” said Marya Dmitrievna, touching the cheek of Natasha, her goddaughter and favorite, with her big hand.
Mikhail Ivanovich, who had no idea when this you and I had spoken such words about Bonaparte, but who understood that he was needed in order to launch into the favorite subject, looked at the young prince in surprise, not knowing what would come of it.
On the way to his sister’s room, in the gallery that connected one house to the other, Prince Andrei met the sweetly smiling Mlle Bourienne, who three times that day had already run into him with her rapturous and na&#239;ve smile in secluded passages.
“But am I not too cold with him?” thought Princess Marya. “I’m trying to restrain myself, because deep in my soul I feel myself already too close to him; but he doesn’t know all that I’m thinking about him and may imagine that I find him disagreeable.”
“Faites avancer celles de la r&#233;serve,” ‡273 said Napoleon, and, riding on a few paces, he stopped over Prince Andrei, who lay on his back, the staff of the standard fallen beside him (the standard had already been taken as a trophy by the French).
“I loved you all and did nothing bad to anybody, and what have you done to me? Ah, what have you done to me?” said her lovely, pitiful, dead face. In the corner, something small and red snorted and squealed in Marya Bogdanovna’s white, trembling hands.
At this ball Pierre felt insulted for the first time by the position his wife occupied in high spheres. He was sullen and distracted. There was a deep furrow across his brow, and, standing by the window, he looked through his spectacles, seeing no one.
But two weeks after his departure, just as unexpectedly for those around her, she recovered from her moral illness and became the same as before, only with a changed moral physiognomy, as children get up with a different face after a prolonged illness.
“Thank God!” he said. “My wife has told me everything.” He embraced Pierre with one arm, his daughter with the other. “Lelya, my friend! I’m very, very glad.” His voice quavered. “I loved your father…and she will be a good wife to you…God bless you!…”
“Yes,” said Boris, blushing involuntarily for some reason, “I thought of asking the commander in chief; he received a letter about me from Prince Kuragin; I wanted to ask,” he added, as if apologizing, “because I’m afraid the guards won’t see action.”
“Stop those villains!” Kutuzov said breathlessly to the regimental commander, pointing to the fleeing men; but at the same moment, as if in punishment for those words, bullets, like a flock of birds, flew whistling at the regiment and Kutuzov’s suite.
“What are they doing?” Prince Andrei wondered, looking at them. “Why doesn’t the red-haired artillerist run away, since he has no weapon? Why doesn’t the Frenchman stab him? Before he runs away, the Frenchman will remember his musket and bayonet him.”
The next day Rostov saw off Denisov, who did not want to remain in Moscow a day longer. All Denisov’s Moscow friends were seeing him off at the Gypsies’, and he did not remember how he was put in the sleigh and driven the first three posting stations.
“You do know her husband?” said Anna Pavlovna, closing her eyes and pointing to H&#233;l&#232;ne with a sad gesture. “Ah, she’s such an unhappy and lovely woman! Don’t speak of him in her presence, please don’t speak of him. It’s too painful for her!”
Since the time of his gambling loss, Rostov had resolved to pay back the debt to his parents within five years. They used to send him ten thousand a year, but now he resolved to take only two and leave the rest to his parents in repayment of his debt.
Dolokhov, who had appeared again in Moscow that year after his banishment and his Persian adventures, and who was leading a magnificent gambling and carousing life, became close with his old Petersburg friend Kuragin and used him for his own purposes.
Fatalism in history is inevitable for the explanation of senseless phenomena (that is, those whose sense we do not understand). The more we try to explain sensibly these phenomena of history, the more senseless and incomprehensible they become for us.
Before Anna Pavlovna and the others had time to smile appreciatively at these words of the viscount’s, Pierre again burst into the conversation, and Anna Pavlovna, though she anticipated that he would say something improper, could no longer stop him.
Prince Andrei smiled involuntarily, looking at Captain Tushin. Silent and smiling, Tushin shifted from one bare foot to the other, and looked questioningly with his large, intelligent and kindly eyes first at Prince Andrei, then at the staff officer.
The hussar only sighed, making no reply, and cleared his throat angrily. Down the line of hussars the hoofbeats of a trotting horse were heard, and suddenly out of the night mist, looking like a huge elephant, emerged the figure of a hussar sergeant.
The thought of defeat and flight could not enter Rostov’s head. Though he saw French guns and troops precisely on the Pratzen heights, in the very place where he had been told to look for the commander in chief, he could not and would not believe it.
Rostov felt awkward; he sought and could not find in his mind a joke which would reply to Dolokhov’s words. But, before he managed to do it, Dolokhov, looking straight in Rostov’s face, said to him, slowly and measuredly, so that everyone could hear:
The hunter on the knoll stood with his whip raised; the gentlemen rode up to him at a walk; the hounds, running just on the horizon, were turning away from the hare; the rest of the hunters were also riding away. Everything moved slowly and sedately.
“No, you haven’t understood me,” said his mother, not knowing how to justify herself. “You haven’t understood me, Nikolenka. I wish for your happiness,” she added, and felt that she was not speaking the truth, that she was confused. She began to cry.
“Nonsense, sit down, drink,” said Anatole, and he poured him a big glass of Madeira. The coachman’s eyes lit up at the sight of the wine. He declined out of propriety, then drank and wiped his mouth with a red silk handkerchief tucked inside his hat.
Balashov took out the packet that contained the sovereign’s letter and placed it on the table (a table consisting of a door with ripped off hinges sticking out from it, laid over two barrels). Davout took the envelope and read what was written on it.
As soon as the uhlans had gone down the hill, the hussars were ordered to move up the hill to cover the battery. While the hussars took the place of the uhlans, bullets came flying from the front line, whining and whistling, missing their aim by far.
All through the argument and the rest of dinner, the little princess was silent and kept glancing fearfully now at Princess Marya, now at her father-in-law. When they left the table, she took her sister-in-law by the arm and led her to another room.
“For not overstaying and clinging to a woman’s skirt. Service before all. Thank you, thank you!” And he went on writing, so that spatters flew from his scratching pen. “If you want to say something, speak. I can do the two things at once,” he added.
“Well, now to the health of beautiful women,” said Dolokhov, and with a serious expression, but with a smile at the corners of his mouth, he turned to Pierre, glass in hand. “To the health of beautiful women, Petrusha, and of their lovers,” he said.
“Forgive your enemy, take no revenge upon him, unless it be by doing him good. Having thus fulfilled the higher law, you will recover the traces of the ancient majesty you have lost,” he concluded and, standing up, he embraced Pierre and kissed him.
“A whole ye-e-ear!” Natasha said suddenly, only now understanding that the wedding was to be postponed for a year. “But why a year? Why a year?…” Prince Andrei began to explain to her the reasons for this postponement. Natasha did not listen to him.
“How clear it is, Nicolas!” Sonya’s voice said. Nikolai turned to look at Sonya and bent down to see her face more closely. A totally new, dear face with black eyebrows and mustache, both near and distant in the moonlight, peeked from the sable fur.
“No, I can’t believe it,” Sonya repeated. “I don’t understand. How is it that you’ve loved a man for a whole year and suddenly…You’ve only seen him three times, Natasha, I don’t believe you, you’re joking. To forget everything in three days and so…”
“Yes, to ask for her hand again, to be magnanimous and all that?…Yes, it’s very noble, but I can’t walk sur les bris&#233;es de monsieur. *389 If you wish to be my friend, never speak to me of that…of all that. Well, good-bye. You will deliver it?…”
On receiving the news of Natasha’s illness, the countess, though not quite recovered and still weak, went to Moscow with Petya and all the household, and the whole Rostov family moved from Marya Dmitrievna’s to their own house and settled in Moscow.
“Schon fleissig!” †183 said Rostov, still with the same joyful, brotherly smile, which never left his animated face. “Hoch Oestreicher! Hoch Russen! Kaiser Alexander hoch!” ‡184 he addressed the German, repeating words often spoken by the landlord.
“So you’ve spruced yourself up like that for the guests, eh?” he said. “Fine, very fine. You do your hair up in some new way for the guests, but I say to you in front of the guests that in future you dare not change anything without my permission.”
Soon after he was received into the brotherhood of the Masons, Pierre left for the province of Kiev, where the greater part of his peasants were, with a full set of instructions he had written out for himself about what he was to do on his estates.
“What’s evil for another person is wrong,” said Pierre, pleased to feel that for the first time since his arrival Prince Andrei was becoming animated and was beginning to talk and wanted to speak out everything that had made him the way he was now.
“What’s he talking about?” thought Prince Andrei. “Ah, the spring, probably,” he thought, looking about. “So it is, everything’s green already…so quickly! Birches, and bird cherry, and alders already beginning…But no sign of oaks. Ah, there’s one.”
“The sovereign?…No, a minister…prince…ambassador…Don’t you see the feathers?…” came from the crowd. One person in the crowd, better dressed than the others, seemed to know everyone and called by name the most distinguished dignitaries of that time.
“Yakov! Let’s have a bottle, Yakov!” shouted the host himself, a tall, handsome man, who was standing in the midst of the crowd in nothing but a fine shirt open on his chest. “Wait, gentlemen. Here’s Petrusha, my dear friend,” he turned to Pierre.
After the princess, Prince Vassily came out. Staggering, he reached the sofa on which Pierre was sitting and collapsed on it, covering his eyes with his hand. Pierre noted that he was pale and his lower jaw was twitching and shaking as in a fever.
Prince Andrei said nothing to Tushin. The two men were so busy that they seemed not even to see each other. Having limbered up the two remaining guns of the four (one smashed cannon and a unicorn20 were abandoned), Prince Andrei rode up to Tushin.
“Yes, yes,” he said, “it’s hard, I’m afraid it’s hard to find…it happens! Yes, it happens to everybody…” And, giving his son a fleeting look, the count started out of the room…Nikolai had been prepared for a rebuff, but he had never expected this…
“Now you have seen the lesser light,” someone’s voice said to him. Then candles were lit again, the voices said he must see the full light, and his eyes were uncovered again, and more than ten voices suddenly said: “Sic transit gloria mundi.” *292
“What can you tell me, Prince, about my Boris?” she said, overtaking him in the front hall. (She pronounced the name Boris with a special emphasis on the o .) “I cannot remain in Petersburg any longer. Tell me, what news can I bring my poor boy?”
“The thing is, my dear…” the count said to the deferential young man as he came in. “Bring me…” He pondered. “Yes, yes, seven hundred roubles. And see that you don’t bring torn and dirty ones like the other time, but nice ones, for the countess.”
Number one leaped back briskly. A deafening metallic sound rang out, and a shell flew whistling over the heads of all our men at the foot of the hill and, falling far short of the enemy, showed by a puff of smoke the place where it hit and burst.
“Well, now, they say, my dear, that you were educated abroad. Not like your father and me, who were taught to read by the beadle. Tell me, my dear, you’re now serving in the horse guards?” the old man asked, studying Anatole closely and intently.
“He’s a man in a gray frock coat, who wished very much that I would say ‘Your Majesty’ to him, but, to his regret, did not receive any titles from me. That’s what he’s like, and nothing more,” Dolgorukov replied, glancing at Bilibin with a smile.
Princess Marya shrugged her shoulders, but took the glass obediently and, calling to the nanny, began to administer the medicine. The baby cried and wheezed. Prince Andrei, wincing, clutched his head, went out, and sat on a sofa in the next room.
For Natasha, this family intimacy here, at a ball, seemed offensive, as if there were no other place for family conversations except at a ball. She did not look at and did not listen to Vera, who was saying something to her about her green dress.
“That’s terrible! No, it’s terrible, terrible!” Natasha said suddenly and sobbed again. “I’ll die, waiting a year: it’s impossible, it’s terrible!” She looked into her fianc&#233;’s face and saw there an expression of compassion and bewilderment.
“Why the postponement? Why no betrothal?” he thought. Talking with his mother once about his sister, he found, to his surprise and partly to his satisfaction, that deep in her heart his mother also sometimes looked mistrustfully at this marriage.
Ilya Andreich approved of this suggestion, grasping its good sense at once. If the old man softens, it will be all the better if they come to him in Moscow or Bald Hills afterwards; if not, then they could marry against his will only in Otradnoe.
For him it was no new conviction that his presence at all ends of the world, from Africa to the steppes of Muscovy, struck people in the same way and threw them into the madness of self-oblivion. He ordered his horse brought and rode to his camp.
From behind the door came the regular sounds of a lathe. The princess timidly pulled the easily and smoothly opening door and stopped in the doorway. The prince was working at the lathe and, having glanced at her, went on with what he was doing.
He spoke so quickly that half the words remained unfinished, but his son was used to understanding him. He led his son to the desk, opened the lid, pulled out a drawer, and took from it a notebook filled with his bold, tall, compact handwriting.
“Well, that’s fine,” the regimental commander went on. “The men get a glass of vodka each from me,” he added loudly, so that the soldiers could hear. “I’m grateful to you all! Thank God!” And, going ahead of the company, he rode to the next one.
In the evening Prince Vassily arrived. He was met on the “avenue” (as they called the front drive) by the coachmen and servants, who with shouts dragged his carts and sleigh to the wing over the road that had been deliberately covered with snow.
When the sovereign had ridden by almost all the regiments, the troops began a ceremonial march past him, and Rostov, on Bedouin, newly purchased from Denisov, rode at the tail end of his squadron—that is, alone and in full view of the sovereign.
“Non, c’est l’estomac…dites que c’est l’estomac, dites, Marie, dites…” *284 And the princess wept with a capricious child’s suffering, even shamming somewhat, wringing her little hands. The princess ran out of the room to fetch Marya Bogdanovna.
“Il faut absolument que vous veniez me voir,”  she said to him in a tone implying that, for certain considerations, which he could not know, this was an absolute necessity. “Mardi entre les huit et neuf heures. Vous me ferez grand plaisir.” #302
“I don’t know how to answer your question,” he said, blushing without knowing why himself. “I decidedly don’t know what kind of girl she is; I simply cannot analyze her. She’s enchanting. But why, I don’t know: that’s all one can say about her.”
Through Mlle Bourienne, Prince Nikolai Andreich knew all the rumors going around town and had read the note to Princess Marya in which Natasha refused her fianc&#233;. He seemed more cheerful than usual and awaited his son with great impatience.
“No, you may not,” Prince Andrei said, laughing, letting Pierre know by the pressure of his hand that there was no need to ask. He was about to say more, but just then Prince Vassily and his daughter rose, and the men stood up to let them pass.
“In Moscou  there is a ladee, une dame.  And she is very stingee. She must ’ave two valets de pied ‡63 behind the carriage. And of very grand height. That was in her taste. Now, she ‘ad une femme de chambre, §64 also of grand height. She said…”
“What’s this noise about?” Marya Dmitrievna’s bass voice was suddenly heard all down the table. “What are you pounding the table for?” she addressed the hussar. “Why are you getting excited? Maybe you think the French are here in front of you?”
Zherkov touched his horse with his spurs; it shifted its footing three times excitedly, not knowing which leg to start with, worked it out, and galloped off, going ahead of the company and catching up with the coach, also in time with the song.
Mlle Bourienne spent a long time that evening walking in the winter garden, vainly waiting for someone and now smiling at someone, now waxing tearful, touched in her imagination by the words of sa pauvre m&#232;re  reproaching her for her fall.
All of Rostov’s cards were beaten, and eight hundred roubles were already scored against him. He wrote eight hundred rubles on a card, but, while champagne was served to him, he changed his mind and again wrote an ordinary stake, twenty rubles.
The meeting was over, and on his return home it seemed to Pierre that he had come back from some distant journey, where he had spent dozens of years, had changed completely, and had detached himself from the former order and habits of his life.
Prince Andrei sighed and opened another envelope. This was a two-page, closely written letter from Bilibin. He folded it without reading it and read his father’s letter again, ending with the words: “Gallop to Korchevo and carry out my orders!”
“So I have, good sir,” the old woman replied garrulously. “Just before Christmas I was deemed worthy to partake of the holy, heavenly mysteries20 with the monks there. And now I’m coming from Kolyazin, where a great blessing has been revealed…”
“I’ve heard about cases of that sort, and I know that the sovereign is very severe on such occasions. I think it should not get as far as his majesty. In my opinion, it would be better to ask the corps commander directly…But generally I think…”
“Don’t talk to me like that: I’m not worthy of it!” cried Natasha, and she was about to leave the room, but Pierre held her back by the hand. He knew he had something more to tell her. But when he said it, he was surprised at his words himself.
“Quelle belle personne!” *36 said everyone who saw her. As if struck by something extraordinary, the viscount shrugged his shoulders and lowered his eyes while she was seating herself before him and shining upon him that same unchanging smile.
Kutuzov walked slowly and indolently past the thousands of eyes that were popping from their sockets, following the superior. Coming up to the third company, he suddenly stopped. His suite, not foreseeing this stop, inadvertently ran into him.
“Not Kutuzov, but what’s his name—well, it makes no difference, there weren’t many left alive. Go over there, to that village, all the superiors are assembled there,” said this officer, pointing to the village of Hostieradek, and he passed by.
“No, just look, what a moon!…Ah, how lovely! Come here. Darling, dear heart, come here. Well, you see? I’d like to sit on my heels, like this, take myself by the knees—tight, as tight as possible, you’ve got to strain—and fly away! Like this!”
“Very glad to see you, Prince,” he said. “Just a moment…” he turned to Magnitsky, interrupting his story. “We’ve agreed that tonight will be a dinner for pleasure and not a word about business.” He turned back to the speaker and laughed again.
Each dog knew its master and its name. Each hunter knew his task, place, and purpose. As soon as they went beyond the fence, everybody, with no noise or talk, spread out evenly and calmly along the road and field leading to the Otradnoe woods.
Si vous n’avez rien de mieux &#224; faire, Monsieur le comte  (or mon prince), et si la perspective de passer la soir&#233;e chez une pauvre malade ne vous effraye pas trop, je serai charm&#233;e de vous voir chez moi entre 7 et 10 heures. †3
And, picturing how the policeman waved his arms, he again burst into resounding, bass-voiced laughter, which shook his whole stout body, as people laugh who always eat, and especially drink, very well. “So please do come for dinner,” he said.
“Tell these damned devils to clear the road!” shouted Denisov, obviously in a fit of temper, his coal-black eyes with bloodshot whites rolling and shining, and waving his sheathed saber, which he held in a small, bare hand as red as his face.
On the French side, among those groups where the guns were, a puff of smoke appeared, a second, a third almost simultaneously, and just as the sound of the first shot reached them, a fourth appeared. Two sounds one after another, and a third.
The soldier at whom the laughing men were pointing was Dolokhov. Prince Andrei recognized him and listened to what he was saying. Dolokhov and his company commander had come to the line from the left flank, where their regiment was stationed.
“How she loves me!” thought Princess Marya. “How happy I am now, and how happy I may be with such a friend and such a husband! Can it be—a husband?” she thought, not daring to look up at his face, still feeling that same gaze directed at her.
They all wished for only one thing: to go quickly against the enemy under the sovereign’s leadership. Under the command of the sovereign himself, it would be impossible not to defeat anyone whatever—so thought Rostov and most of the officers.
“Eh, bien, mon cher, votre petite princesse est tr&#232;s bien, tr&#232;s bien,”  said the viscount, getting into the carriage with Ippolit. “Mais tr&#232;s bien.”  He kissed the tips of his fingers. “Et tout-&#224;-fait fran&#231;aise.” *68
Prince Andrei merely shrugged his shoulders at Pierre’s childish talk. He made it look as though he could not reply to such stupidity; but in fact it was hard to reply to this na&#239;ve question in any other way than Prince Andrei had done.
“You don’t want to? Well, come here, then,” she said and went deeper among the plants and dropped her doll. “Closer, closer!” she whispered. She caught the officer by the cuffs with both hands, and her flushed face showed solemnity and fear.
“Ah, ch&#232;re amie,”  answered Princess Marya, “je vous ai pri&#233;e de ne jamais me pr&#233;venir de l’humeur dans laquelle se trouve mon p&#232;re. Je ne me permets pas de le juger, et je ne voudrais pas que les autres le fassent.” ‡153
Rostov, wiping his muddy hands on his breeches, looked at his enemy and wanted to run further, supposing that the further ahead he got, the better it would be. But Bogdanych, though he neither looked at nor recognized Rostov, shouted at him.
This short man was wearing a white leather apron that covered his chest and part of his legs, on his neck there was some sort of necklace, and behind the necklace rose a high white jabot, framing his elongated face, which was lit from below.
One morning Colonel Adolf Berg, whom Pierre knew, as he knew everyone in Moscow and Petersburg, came to see him in a spanking-new uniform and with his side-whiskers brushed and pomaded forward, as the sovereign Alexander Pavlovich wore them.
“I know no one can help if nature doesn’t help,” Prince Andrei said, visibly embarrassed. “I agree that only one case in a million ends badly, but it’s her and my fantasy. People have said things to her, she’s had dreams, and she’s afraid.”
“Ah, Bondarenko, friend of my heart,” he said to the hussar who came rushing for his horse. “Give him a cooling down, my friend,” he said with that merry brotherly tenderness with which all fine young men treat everyone when they are happy.
On the other side the naked eye could make out the enemy and his battery, from which a puff of milk-white smoke appeared. The smoke was followed by the sound of a distant shot, and it could be seen how our troops speeded up at the crossing.
“Well, my friend, tomorrow we’re off at last,” he said to him one day, closing his eyes, fingering Pierre’s elbow, and in such a tone as if what he said had been decided between them long, long ago and could not have been decided otherwise.
“So at least we can make full use of you now, dear Prince,” the little princess said, in French, of course, to Prince Vassily. “It won’t be as at our soir&#233;es at Annette’s, where you always run away. Remember cette ch&#232;re Annette! ”
“I haven’t called on you all this time, because I was at my father’s: I had to discuss a very important matter. I came back only last night,” he said, glancing at Natasha. “I must talk with you, Countess,” he added after a moment’s silence.
“Wonderful!” said Natasha. “One could just fall in love with her!” At that moment the last chords of the overture sounded and the conductor tapped with his baton. The late-coming men went to their seats in the parterre and the curtain rose.
Returning late in the evening, Sonya came into Natasha’s room and, to her surprise, found her still dressed, asleep on the sofa. On the table next to her lay the opened letter from Anatole. Sonya picked up the letter and started reading it.
Balaga was a blond, squat, snub-nosed man, with a red face and an especially red, thick neck, about twenty-seven years old, with small, glittering eyes and a little beard. He was wearing a thin, blue, silk-lined kaftan over a winter jacket.
“No, I know it’s all over,” she said hastily. “No, it can never be. I’m only tormented by the wrong I’ve done him. Tell him only that I beg him to forgive me, to forgive me for everything…” Her whole body shook, and she sat down on a chair.
“I know, dear, good princess,” said Anna Mikhailovna, seizing the portfolio with her hand and so firmly that it was clear she would not soon let go of it. “Dear princess, I beg you, I beseech you, have pity on him. Je vous en conjure… *140
And Kutuzov smiled with such an expression as if he was saying: “You have every right not to believe me, and I’m even quite indifferent to whether you believe me or not, but you have no cause for telling me so. And that’s the whole point.”
“What do you mean, my dear man?” Nesvitsky said, stopping, taking off his cap, and smoothing his sweat-dampened hair with a plump hand. “What do you mean I didn’t tell you to set fire to the bridge, since you put flammable material there?”
To say “tomorrow” and keep up the tone of propriety was not difficult, but to come home alone, to see his sisters, brother, mother, father, to confess and ask for money to which he had no right after giving his word of honor, was terrible.
The only moment she took a real part in was when they remembered Sonya’s first arrival. Sonya told how she was afraid of Nikolai, because he had a jacket with cords on it, and her nanny told her that she, too, would be stitched with cords.
On the same day on which Napoleon gave orders to cross the Niemen, and his vanguard troops, driving back the Cossacks, crossed the Russian border, Alexander spent the evening at Bennigsen’s house—at the ball given by his adjutant generals.
“Boris, come here,” she said with a significant and sly air. “There’s something I must tell you. Here, here,” she said and led him to the conservatory, to the place between the tubs where she had been hiding. Boris, smiling, followed her.
Noticing Anna Mikhailovna and her son, Prince Vassily dismissed the doctor with a bow and silently, but with a questioning look, came over to them. The son noticed how deep grief suddenly appeared in his mother’s eyes and smiled slightly.
Toutes les fois cependant que l’Empereur de Russie ratifierait la dite convention, je la ratifierai; mais ce n’est q’une ruse. Marchez, d&#233;truisez l’arm&#233;e russe…vous &#234;tes en position de prendre son bagage et son artillerie.
But when Katya brought the dress requested, Princess Marya was still sitting motionless before the mirror, looking at her face, and saw in the mirror that tears had welled up in her eyes and her mouth was trembling, getting ready to weep.
“Why did you never come to Annette’s?” the little princess asked Anatole. “Ah! I know, I know,” she said, winking, “your brother Ippolit has told me about your affairs. Oh!” she shook her finger at him. “I even know your Parisian pranks!”
The sovereign looked fixedly and attentively into Kutuzov’s eyes, waiting to see if he would say something more. But Kutuzov, for his part, bowed his head deferentially and also seemed to be waiting. The silence lasted for about a minute.
“Lovely, lovely, uncle! More, more!” cried Natasha as soon as he finished. She jumped up from her place, embraced her uncle, and kissed him. “Nikolenka, Nikolenka!” she said, glancing at her brother, as if asking him: what on earth is it?
The army moved from west to east, and six-horse relays carried him there as well. On the tenth of June, he caught up with the army and spent the night in the Wilkowiski forest, in quarters prepared for him on the estate of a Polish count.
And with those free and familiarly graceful movements which distinguished him, he took the maid of honor’s hand, kissed it, and, having kissed it, waved the maid-of-honorly hand a little, sprawled himself in an armchair, and looked away.
“It’s impossible not to admit,” Prince Andrei went on, “that Napoleon was a great man on the bridge of Arcole, and in the Jaffa hospital, when he shook hands with the plague victims,20 but…there are other acts which are hard to justify.”
“I often think—maybe it’s sinful,” said the princess, “but I often think: here Count Kirill Vladimirovich Bezukhov lives alone…this enormous fortune…and what does he live for? Life’s a burden to him, and Borya is only beginning to live.”
“You are mistaken,” Boris said unhurriedly, with a bold and slightly mocking smile. “I am Boris, the son of Princess Anna Mikhailovna Drubetskoy. The Rostov father is called Ilya, the son is Nikolai. And I never knew any Madame Jacquot.”
“Yes, please do,” said the general, repeating what had already been ordered in detail, “and tell the hussars that they are to cross last and set fire to the bridge as I said, and inspect the flammable material while still on the bridge.”
“Ah, ma bonne, ma bonne,”  he said, rising and taking her by both hands. He sighed and added: “Le sort de mon fils est en vos mains. D&#233;cidez, ma bonne, ma ch&#232;re, ma douce Marie, qui j’ai toujours aim&#233; comme ma fille.” #256
“Is this your saber?” he shouted. The girls jumped away. Denisov, with frightened eyes, hid his shaggy legs under the blanket, glancing at his friend for help. The door admitted Petya and closed again. Behind the door there was laughter.
As soon as Rostov went through the door of the house, he was enveloped by the stench of rotting flesh and hospital. On the stairs he met a Russian military doctor with a cigar in his mouth. The doctor was followed by a Russian assistant.
A tall, beautiful lady entered the neighboring box, with an enormous braid and very bared, white, full shoulders and neck, on which hung a double string of big pearls. She took a long time to settle herself, rustling her heavy silk gown.
“C’est fait!” *259 she said to the count, pointing with a solemn gesture to the countess, who was holding the snuffbox with the portrait in one hand and the letter in the other, and pressing her lips first to the one, then to the other.
There was a ringing of bells; the club stewards rushed forward; scattered through different rooms, the guests, like rye shaken in a shovel, came together in one heap and stopped in the big drawing room by the door to the reception hall.
“No, dear heart.” (The count was also embarrassed. He felt he had managed his wife’s estate poorly and was guilty before his children, but he did not know how to set things to rights.) “No, I ask you to take care of things, I’m old, I…”
“No one must know anything!” the sovereign added, frowning. Boris understood that this referred to him and, closing his eyes, bowed his head slightly. The sovereign went back into the room and remained at the ball for another half hour.
Excited and irritated by these thoughts, Prince Andrei went to his room to write to his father, to whom he wrote every day. In the corridor he met his roommate Nesvitsky and the joker Zherkov; they were laughing at something, as usual.
Miloradovich turned his horse sharply and placed himself slightly behind the sovereign. The Apsherontsy, excited by the presence of the sovereign, marched past the emperors and their suite at a dashingly brisk pace, beating their feet.
“Well, did you have a good time?” asked Ilya Andreich, smiling joyfully and proudly at his son. Nikolai wanted to say “yes,” but could not: he all but burst into sobs. The count was lighting his pipe and did not notice his son’s state.
After dinner they went to have coffee in Napoleon’s study, which four days earlier had been the study of the emperor Alexander. Napoleon sat down, sipped his coffee from a S&#232;vres cup, and motioned Balashov to the chair beside him.
“What can I tell you?” said the prince, in a cold, bored tone. “Qu’a-t-on d&#233;cid&#233;? On a d&#233;cid&#233; que Buonaparte a br&#251;l&#233; ses vaisseaux, et je crois que nous sommes en train de br&#251;ler les n&#244;tres. ”§8
The gray-haired valet sat dozing and listening to the prince’s snoring in the immense study. From the far side of the house, from behind a closed door, came the sounds of a Dusek sonata,45 the difficult passages repeated twenty times.
“Ah, you devil’s puppet, stir your stumps, get looking,” Denisov shouted suddenly, turning purple and hurling himself at the lackey with a menacing gesture. “There’ll be a purse, or I’ll flog you to death. I’ll flog you all to death!”
“Your Excellency,” Prince Andrei broke the silence with his sharp voice, “you were pleased to send me to Captain Tushin’s battery. I was there and found two-thirds of the men and horses killed, two guns crippled, and no cover at all.”
“Where are you going? Stop right there!” voices whispered to Lazarev, who did not know where to go. Lazarev stopped, casting a fearful sidelong glance at the colonel, and his face twitched, as happens with soldiers called out of line.
Natasha took up the cause of reconciliation and brought it to a point where Nikolai obtained his mother’s promise that Sonya would not be oppressed, and promised himself that he would not undertake anything in secret from his parents.
She came out for dinner with red eyes. Marya Dmitrievna, who knew how the prince had received the Rostovs, pretended not to notice Natasha’s upset face and bantered, firmly and loudly, with the count and the other guests at the table.
“What about him? A madcap…doesn’t want to listen. Well, there’s no point talking, we’ve worn the poor girl out as it is,” said Marya Dmitrievna. “And my advice to you is to finish your business and go home to Otradnoe…and wait there…”
Pierre’s face, pale before then, became distorted with rage. He seized Anatole by the collar of his uniform with his big hand and began shaking him from side to side, until Anatole’s face acquired a sufficiently frightened expression.
A bottle of rum was brought. Two lackeys were tearing out the frame that prevented one from sitting on the outer ledge of the window; they were obviously hurrying and intimidated by the orders and shouts of the surrounding gentlemen.
The princess, holding the dog on her lap with her dry, thin hands, looked attentively into Prince Vassily’s eyes; but it was evident that she would not break the silence with a question, even if she had to remain silent till morning.
“She let the falcon go, from her right sleeve let it go,” said the song, involuntarily arousing a cheerful, merry feeling. Their conversation would probably have been different, if they had not been talking to the sounds of the song.
“Le prince Hyppolite Kouragine—charmant jeune homme. Monsieur Kroug, charg&#233; d’affaires de Kopenhague—un esprit profond,”  and simply: “Monsieur Shittoff, un homme de beaucoup de m&#233;rite,” *297 of the one who bore that title.
“Whoa! Giddap, now!…Whoa!” the cries of Balaga and the young fellow sitting on the box were all that was heard. On Arbat Square the troika snagged a carriage, something cracked, there was a shout, and the troika flew along the Arbat.
“Pyotr Kirilyich,” she began, speaking quickly, “Prince Bolkonsky was your friend—is your friend,” she corrected herself (it seemed to her that everything only was and that now it was all different). “He told me then to turn to you…”
“Papa, I didn’t want to judge,” Prince Andrei said in a bilious and hard tone, “but you challenged me, and I’ve said and will always say that Princess Marya is not to blame, but the one to blame…the one to blame is this Frenchwoman…”
“Prince Vassily. He was very nice. He agreed at once to do everything and reported to the emperor,” Princess Anna Mikhailovna said with rapture, forgetting entirely about all the humiliation she had gone through to achieve her goal.
“Well, enough from you,” the auditor said with a beaming smile, na&#239;ve and at the same time sly, as if he was flattered to be the butt of Zherkov’s jokes, and as if he was deliberately trying to seem stupider than he really was.
In the beginning of the winter of 1805–1806, Pierre received the customary pink note from Anna Pavlovna with an invitation, to which was added: “Vous trouverez chez moi la belle H&#233;l&#232;ne, qu’on ne se lasse jamais voir.” *225
The Rostovs were going to the ball together with Marya Ignatievna Peronsky, the countess’s friend and relation, a skinny and yellow lady-in-waiting of the old court, who guided the provincial Rostovs through Petersburg high society.
“Toujours charmante et m&#233;lancolique, cette ch&#232;re Julie,” ‡371 she said to the daughter. “Boris says his soul is eased in your house. He has suffered so many disappointments, and he is so sensitive,” she said to the mother.
The bride- and groom-to-be, no longer mentioning trees showering darkness and melancholy on them, made plans for the future setting-up of a brilliant house in Petersburg, paid visits, and prepared everything for a brilliant wedding.
“Mind you, the count doesn’t know anything. You make as if you don’t know anything either,” she said to him. “And I’ll go and tell her there’s nothing to wait for! Stay for dinner if you like,” Marya Dmitrievna called out to Pierre.
“Good day, General!” he said. “I have received the emperor Alexander’s letter, which you delivered, and am very glad to see you.” He glanced into Balashov’s face with his large eyes and at once began to look straight ahead past him.
“Marya Lvovna Karagin with daughter!” the countess’s enormous footman announced in a bass voice, coming to the door of the drawing room. The countess pondered and took a pinch from a gold snuffbox with her husband’s portrait on it.
“Stop it, Boris, you’re such a diplomat” (the word diplomat  was much in vogue among children in that special sense they endowed it with); “it’s even boring,” Natasha said in an offended, trembling voice. “Why is she pestering me?”
“And what, has he aged, Prince Vassily?” asked the countess. “I haven’t seen him since our theater performances at the Rumyantsevs’. And I suppose he’s forgotten me. Il me faisait la cour, ”‡91 the countess remembered with a smile.
Half an hour later everything was back in its former order, only the rectangles had become gray instead of black. The regimental commander again stepped before the regiment with his bouncing gait and looked it over from a distance.
Zherkov, not taking his hand from his cap, briskly started his horse and galloped off. But as soon as he left Bagration, his strength failed him. An insurmountable fear came over him, and he was unable to go where there was danger.
“Ah, you cursed floor-scrubbers! Clean, fresh, as if from a promenade, not like us sinful army folk,” Rostov said, with baritone sounds in his voice and an army manner that were new for Boris, pointing to his mud-splashed breeches.
“Darling Denisov!” shrieked Natasha, beside herself with rapture, and she ran to him, embraced and kissed him. Everyone was embarrassed by Natasha’s behavior. Denisov also blushed, but smiled, and, taking Natasha’s hand, kissed it.
“Supper, time for supper! The Gypsies are here!” Indeed, some dark-haired men and women, saying something with a Gypsy accent, were already coming in from the cold. Nikolai knew it was all over, but he said in an indifferent voice:
“Women,” Pierre said in a low, barely audible voice. The Mason did not stir and did not speak for a long time after this reply. At last he moved towards Pierre, took the cloth that was lying on the table, and again blindfolded him.
“Prince, I did not invite you here—go, please, go!” He jumped up and opened the door for him. “Go now,” he repeated, not believing himself and glad of the expression of embarrassment and fear that appeared on Prince Vassily’s face.
Before the countess had time to reply, Prince Andrei, with an anxious and serious face, came into the drawing room. As soon as he saw Natasha, his face lit up. He kissed the countess’s and Natasha’s hand and sat down near the sofa…
Ilya Andreevich was slightly flushed from the wine and the driving; his eyes, veiled with moisture, had a special glitter, and, wrapped in his fur coat, sitting in his saddle, he had the look of a child made ready to go for a walk.
“Dieu, quelle virulente sortie!” ‡4 the entering prince replied, not ruffled in the least by such a reception. He was wearing an embroidered court uniform, stockings, shoes, and stars, and had a bright expression on his flat face.
Pierre went through the door, stepping on the soft carpet, and noticed that the adjutant and the unknown lady, and some other servants—all came in after him, as if there was no longer any need to ask permission to enter that room.
The blue, clear eyes looked at the commander in chief just as boldly as at the regimental commander, as if tearing by their expression the curtain of convention that had so widely separated the commander in chief from the soldier.
“If he, however, is senior to mine in the ranking,” the German hussar colonel said, turning red and addressing an adjutant who had ridden up, “leave him to do as he wants. I my hussars cannot sacrifice. Bugler! Sound the retreat!”
“Very much,” said Nikolai, blushing and with a stupid, casual smile for which he could not forgive himself for a long time afterwards. “I’ve lost a bit at cards, that is, a good deal, even a very great deal, forty-three thousand.”
“Ah, no, not at all, on the contrary, I’m very glad to make your acquaintance,” said Pierre, and, glancing once again at his new acquaintance’s hands, he took a closer look at his ring. He saw a death’s head on it, a Masonic sign.
The next day Davout left early in the morning and, summoning Balashov, told him imposingly that he asked him to remain there, to move along with the baggage, if such were the orders, and to speak with no one except M. de Castries.
“Peace has been concluded…” he began. But Napoleon did not let him speak. He clearly needed to speak himself, and he went on to speak with that eloquence and unrestrained irritation to which spoiled people are so greatly inclined.
Evidently something suddenly changed in the princess’s mind; her thin lips turned pale (her eyes remained the same), and her voice, when she began to speak, kept breaking into such tremors as she evidently did not expect herself.
Dolokhov, now changed into a gray soldier’s greatcoat, did not wait to be called out. The trim figure of the fair-haired soldier with clear blue eyes stepped from the line. He went up to the commander in chief and presented arms.
Just then the sun began to hide itself behind the clouds. Ahead of Rostov, another stretcher appeared. And his fear of death and the stretcher, and his love of the sun and life—all merged into one painfully disturbing impression.
“My God! What is it?” thought Rostov. “Here, where the sovereign may see them at any moment!…But no, it must be just a few scoundrels. It will pass, that’s not it, it can’t be,” he thought. “Just ride past them quickly, quickly!”
“Well, Denisov’s something else,” replied Nikolai, making it clear that, compared with Dolokhov, even Denisov was nothing, “you should understand what a soul Dolokhov has, you should see him with his mother, he has such a heart!”
Pierre walked along, rolling his fat body, parting the crowd, nodding to right and left as casually and good-naturedly as if he was walking through a marketplace crowd. He moved through the crowd, evidently searching for someone.
“Your proposal…” the countess began gravely. He was silent, looking into her eyes. “Your proposal…” (she became embarrassed) “is pleasing to us and…I accept your proposal, I am glad. My husband, too…I hope…but it depends on her…”
The hussars stood for about an hour in the same place. A cannonade began. Count Ostermann and his suite rode up behind the squadron, stopped, talked with the commander of the regiment, and rode off towards the cannon on the hill.
“When that cannonball went flying by me, uncle,” a young soldier with a huge mouth said, barely holding back his laughter, “I just went dead. By God, I got scared really bad!” the soldier said, as if boasting that he was scared.
“If there were no Bagration, il faudrait l’inventer, ”*278 said the joker Shinshin, parodying the words of Voltaire.5 No one spoke of Kutuzov, and some denounced him in whispers, calling him a court weathercock and an old satyr.
He sometimes noticed with displeasure that he had happened to repeat the same thing on the same day in different companies. But he was so busy for whole days that he had no time to think about the fact that he was doing nothing.
When they all set out for home from Pelageya Danilovna’s, Natasha, who always saw and noticed everything, arranged it so that she and Louisa Ivanovna got into the sleigh with Dimmler, and Sonya got in with Nikolai and the maids.
“No, wait, ah, how funny you are!” said Nikolai, peering at her and finding in his sister as well something new, unusual, and enchantingly tender, which he had not seen in her before. “Natasha, it’s something magical, isn’t it?”
Rostov threw on a cloak, told Lavrushka to bring the things, and went with Ilyin, here slipping in the mud, there splashing straight on under the subsiding rain, in the evening darkness, occasionally broken by distant lightning.
“Attendez,”  Anna Pavlovna said, pondering. “Tonight I’ll discuss it with Lise (la femme du jeune  Bolkonsky). And maybe something can be settled. Ce sera dans votre famille que je ferai mon apprentissage de vielle fille. ”††24
“Well, well, Mitenka, see that it’s all nice. Right, right,” he would say, looking over the enormous, opened-out table. “The main thing’s the setout. So, so…” And, sighing self-contentedly, he would go back to the drawing room.
“What makes you say this young man is so wealthy?” asked the countess, leaning away from the girls, who at once pretended they were not listening. “The man has only illegitimate children. It seems…Pierre, too, is illegitimate.”
When Anna Mikhailovna came back from Bezukhov’s, the money was already lying before the countess, all in new notes, under a handkerchief on a little table, and Anna Mikhailovna noticed that something was troubling the countess.
“I’ve got four sons in the army, and I’m not grieving. It’s all God’s will: you can die in your sleep, and God can spare you in battle,” the dense voice of Marya Dmitrievna rang out effortlessly from the other end of the table.
“Hasn’t been back since evening. Must’ve lost,” replied Lavrushka. “I know for sure, if he wins, he comes early so as to boast, but if he stays away till morning, it means he blew it—and he’ll come angry. Shall I serve coffee?”
“Il nous arrive du monde, mon prince,”  said Mlle Bourienne, unfolding a white napkin with her pink little hands. “Son excellence le prince Kouragine avec son fils, &#224; ce que j’ai entendu dire?” *238 she said questioningly.
“Ah, my dear fellow! My head is spinning,” said the old man, smiling to his son, as if embarrassed. “You might at least help me! We need singers. I have musicians, but shall we invite some Gypsies? You military folk like that.”
Having talked for some time in the general circle, Speransky got up and, going over to Prince Andrei, called him away to the other end of the room. It was clear that he considered it necessary to concern himself with Bolkonsky.
“Whatever misfortune there may be,” Prince Andrei went on, “I beg you, Mademoiselle Sophie, whatever may happen, turn to him alone for advice and help. He’s the most absentminded and ridiculous man, but he has a heart of gold.”
The day before the count was to come back, Sonya noticed that Natasha sat all morning by the window in the drawing room, as if waiting for something, and that she made a sign to a passing officer, whom Sonya took to be Anatole.
Several wounded soldiers were walking down the road. Oaths, shouts, groans merged into one general clamor. The shooting died down, and, as Rostov learned later, it had been Russian and Austrian soldiers shooting at each other.
The Mason looked at Pierre attentively and smiled, as a rich man, holding millions in his hands, would smile at a poor man who has said to him that he, the poor man, did not have the five roubles that would make his happiness.
“Why is it wrong?” Prince Andrei repeated. “It’s not given to people to judge what’s right or wrong. People have eternally been mistaken and will be mistaken, and in nothing more so than in what they consider right and wrong.”
“Well, what is it tonight?” asked her mother, settling on the pillows and waiting until Natasha, having kicked her feet and turned over twice, lay next to her under the same blanket, her arms on top it, her expression serious.
There had been many discussions and preparations for this ball in the Rostov family, many fears that they would not receive an invitation, the dresses would not be ready, and everything would not be arranged as it ought to be.
Princess Marya turned, with an absentminded, questioning look, to Pierre, who, the last of the guests, hat in hand and a smile on his face, went up to her after the prince had gone and they were left alone in the drawing room.
“Gentlemen, I’ll do anything, nobody will hear a word from me,” Rostov said in a pleading voice, “but apologize I cannot, by God, I cannot, do what you will! How am I going to apologize, like a little boy asking forgiveness?”
The princess came in and also wept. The elderly lady also dabbed herself with her handkerchief. They kissed Pierre, and he kissed the beautiful H&#233;l&#232;ne’s hand several times. After a while, they were left alone again.
“The devil brought them here!” he thought, as Tikhon slipped a nightgown over his dry old man’s body, the chest overgrown with gray hair. “I didn’t invite them. They’ve come to upset my life. And there’s not much left of it.”
Rostov went on ahead to carry out his errand, and, to his great surprise, discovered that Dolokhov, this rowdy duellist, lived in Moscow with his old mother and hunchbacked sister, and was a most affectionate son and brother.
“Ah! Princess Marya!” he suddenly said unnaturally and threw down his chisel. (The wheel went on turning by inertia. Princess Marya long remembered the dying creak of the wheel, which merged for her with what followed after.)
“Eh, it’s inevitable!” Nikolai thought for the first and last time. And suddenly, in the most casual tone, which made him seem vile to himself, as if he was asking for a carriage in order to go to town, he said to his father:
There was nothing bad or inappropriate in what they said, everything was witty and might have been funny; but that something which constitutes the salt of merriment was not only missing, but they did not even know it existed.
“We’ll see,” replied Rostov. “Karai, phweet!” he cried, answering his uncle’s words with this call. Karai was an ugly and whiskery old he-dog, famous for having gone alone against a seasoned wolf. Everybody took their places.
Having set out that same night, accompanied by a bugler and two Cossacks, Balashov reached the French outposts at the village of Rykonty, on the Russian side of the Niemen, at dawn. He was stopped by French cavalry sentinels.
The sun was just beginning to rise behind the clouds; the air was fresh and dewy. A herd of cattle was being driven down the road from the village. From the fields, one by one, trilling larks sprayed up like bubbles in water.
“Look at papa,” Natasha shouted to the whole ballroom (completely forgetting that she was dancing with a grown-up), bending her curly head to her knees and dissolving into her ringing laughter for the whole ballroom to hear.
“And I tell you, Rostov, that you’ve got to apologize to the regimental commander,” said a tall staff captain with grizzled hair, enormous mustaches, and a large-featured, wrinkled face, to the crimson-faced, excited Rostov.
“You there, brother!” the Cossack said to a supply soldier with a cart, who was pushing through the infantrymen crowded right against his wheels and horses, “you there! As if you can’t wait: look, the general needs to pass.”
On business to do with the trusteeship of the Ryazan estates, Prince Andrei had to see the provincial marshal of nobility. The marshal was Count Ilya Andreevich Rostov, and in the middle of May Prince Andrei went to see him.
“Natasha, you are sixteen years old. At your age I was married. You say Borya is sweet. He’s very sweet, and I love him like a son, but what do you want?…What do you think? You’ve turned his head completely, I can see that…”
“That’s the young countess—right you are!—I’ve never seen another like her!” he said, handing a pipe with a long chibouk to Rostov, and, with a habitual gesture, tucking another, its chibouk cut short, between three fingers.
“What’s happened? What has it got to do with me?” he wondered as he was getting dressed to go to Marya Dmitrievna’s. “If only Prince Andrei would come quickly and marry her!” thought Pierre on his way to see Mrs. Akhrosimov.
“Missed!” cried Dolokhov, and, strengthless, he sprawled face down on the snow. Pierre clutched his head and, turning around, walked off towards the woods, treading on the untouched snow and mouthing incoherent words aloud.
“I presume that Freemasonry is the fraternit&#233;  and equality of men with virtuous goals,” said Pierre, embarrassed, even as he was speaking, by the unsuitability of his words to the solemnity of the moment. “I presume…”
Prince Nikolai Andreich, who had always laughed at medical science, had recently, on the advice of Mlle Bourienne, admitted this doctor to his presence and grown used to him. M&#233;tivier called on the prince twice a week.
Over dinner the conversation turned to the latest political news, about Napoleon’s seizure of the lands of the duke of Oldenburg5 and about a Russian note denouncing Napoleon, which had been sent to all the European courts.
The small man with weak, awkward movements constantly asked his orderly to give him another little pipeful for that,  as he put it, and spilling fire from it, ran forward and looked at the French from under his small hand.
“It’s obvious all you women are crybabies,” said Petya, pacing the room in big, resolute strides. “I’m very glad, really very glad, that my brother has distinguished himself. You’re all blubberers! You understand nothing.”
The soldiers who had carried Prince Andrei and had taken from him the little golden icon hung on her brother by Princess Marya, seeing the kindness with which the emperor treated the prisoners, hastened to return the icon.
“Ah, it’s you,” said Pierre, with a distracted and displeased air. “And here I am working,” he said, pointing to his notebook with that look of escaping from life’s adversities with which unhappy people look at their work.
Marya Dmitrievna had told Natasha that Anatole was married. Natasha refused to believe her and demanded that Pierre himself confirm it. Sonya told that to Pierre as she was bringing him down the corridor to Natasha’s room.
A French hussar colonel, obviously just out of bed, came riding from the village on a handsome, well-fed gray horse, accompanied by two hussars. The officer, the soldiers, and their horses had a contented and foppish look.
“Do you want him to answer everybody at once?” asked Prince Andrei. “Besides, in the acts of a statesman one must distinguish among the acts of the private person, the military leader, and the emperor. So it seems to me.”
And Prince Ippolit began to speak in Russian, with a pronunciation such as Frenchmen have after spending a year in Russia. Everyone stayed: so animatedly, so insistently did Prince Ippolit call for attention to his story.
“But you’re still afraid! Eh, you learned people,” said a third, manly voice, interrupting the two others. “That’s why you artillerists are so learned, because you can tote everything along with you, both vodka and grub.”
Rostov took the letter and, throwing the money on the sofa, leaned both elbows on the table and began to read. He read a few lines and glanced angrily at Berg. Having met his eyes, Rostov covered his face with the letter.
And he pointed him to the grand duke, who, a hundred paces from them, in a helmet and a horse guard’s tunic, with his raised shoulders and frowning brows, was shouting something to a white and pale-faced Austrian officer.
On the Pratzen hill, in the same place where he fell with the staff of the standard in his hands, Prince Andrei Bolkonsky lay bleeding profusely and, unbeknownst to himself, letting out soft, pitiful, and childlike moans.
After another five days, the young prince Nikolai Andreich was baptized. The foster mother held the swaddling clothes up with her chin, while the priest anointed the boy’s wrinkled red palms and feet with a goose feather.
Willarski was silent the whole way. To Pierre’s question of what he must do and how to answer, Willarski said only that brothers more worthy than he would test him and that Pierre need do nothing more than tell the truth.
“I’m not afraid of anything,” said Sonya. “May I go now?” She got up. They told Sonya where the barn was, how she should stand silently and listen, and gave her her coat. She threw it over her head and glanced at Nikolai.
“Avant tout dites-moi, comment vous allez, ch&#232;re amie. *5 Set me at ease,” he said, without changing his voice and in a tone in which, through propriety and sympathy, one could discern indifference and even mockery.
“Ah! aujourd’hui on m’a racont&#233; une anecdote moscovite, charmante: il faut que je vous en r&#233;gale. Vous m’excusez, vicomte, il faut que je raconte en russe. Autrement on ne sentira pas le sel de l’histoire.” †62
“I put down” (he spoke in French so that the Englishman would understand him, and he did not speak the language all that well), “I put down fifty imperials—want to make it a hundred?” he added, addressing the Englishman.
“Let’s go to her, I must say good-bye! Or you go alone, wake her up, and I’ll come presently. Petrushka!” he called to his valet. “Come here, take these things out. This goes under the seat, this to the right-hand side.”
“Wait a minute, my dear boy, listen to me,” the staff captain interrupted in his bass voice, calmly stroking his long mustache. “You tell the regimental commander, in front of other officers, that an officer has stolen…”
Prince Andrei could not look with indifference at the standards of the battalions going past him. Looking at a standard, he thought: maybe it is that very standard with which I’ll have to march at the head of the troops.
Having gone less than half a mile at the tail of the column, he stopped by a solitary, deserted house (probably a former tavern), where the road forked. Both roads went down the hill, and troops were marching along both.
Across the paper was scrawled, in pencil, without capitals, without orthography, without punctuation: “unsoundly compiled since copied from french military regulations and unnecessarily deviating from military articles.”
“I won’t sleep anyway. How stupid it is to sleep! Mama, mama, nothing like this has ever happened to me!” she repeated with astonishment and fear before the feeling she was aware of within her. “Who could have thought!…”
He glanced at her, and the serious passion in the expression of her face struck him. Her face said: “Why ask? Why doubt what you cannot help knowing? Why speak when it’s impossible to put everything you feel into words?”
“Not lower, who told you it’s lower?…How do I know what I used to be?” Natasha objected with conviction. “The soul is immortal…which means, if I will live forever, then I also lived before, lived for the whole eternity.”
Boris smiled almost imperceptibly, listening to his mother. He laughed meekly at her simple-hearted slyness, but he listened to her and occasionally questioned her attentively about the Penza and Nizhni Novgorod estates.
“I’m so enchanted with the charms of the intelligence and cultivation of society, especially the women’s, where I have had the happiness to be received, that I have not yet had time to think about the climate,” he said.
“That I will not promise you. You know how besieged Kutuzov has been since he was appointed commander in chief.13 He told me himself that all the Moscow ladies are conspiring to send their children to be his adjutants.”
“Those were extremes, to be sure, but the whole meaning wasn’t in them, the meaning was in the rights of man, emancipation from prejudice, the equality of citizens; and Napoleon kept all these ideas in all their force.”
In spite of, or precisely because of, the fact that what she said was perfectly correct, no one answered her, and the four only exchanged glances with each other. She lingered in the room, with the inkstand in her hand.
“Ho-o-ow’s that you’re standing? Where’s your leg? Where’s your leg?” the regimental commander shouted with an expression of suffering in his voice, still five men away from Dolokhov, who was wearing a bluish greatcoat.
“I humbly thank you, Prince,” replied one of the officers, taking pleasure in conversing with such an important staff official. “An excellent place. We passed just by the park, saw two deer, and such a wonderful house!”
“One was knocked out,” the staff officer replied, “but I cannot understand about the other. I was there myself all the while and giving orders, and I had only just left…It was hot, to tell the truth,” he added modestly.
After five o’clock it was only at the dam of Augesd that the hot cannon fire of the French alone could be heard, from numerous batteries lined up on the slopes of the Pratzen heights and firing at our retreating troops.
In the evening Prince Andrei and Pierre got into a carriage and drove to Bald Hills. Prince Andrei, glancing at Pierre, broke the silence from time to time with speeches which proved that he was in a good state of mind.
“The auditor wrote a petition for you,” Tushin went on, “and you ought to sign it, and, see, you can send it with him” (he pointed to Rostov). “He’s surely got a hand in at the staff. There couldn’t be a better chance.”
“Sonya! Sonya!” the first voice was heard again. “How can you sleep! Just look how lovely it is! Ah, how lovely! Wake up, Sonya,” she said almost with tears in her voice. “There’s never, never been such a lovely night.”
“What orders, Your Excellency?” asked a protodeacon’s bass, hoarse from hallooing, and two black, brilliant eyes looked from under their brows at the silent master. “So you can’t stand it?” these two eyes seemed to say.
Anatole agreed and went to Moscow, where he stayed with Pierre. At first, Pierre received Anatole reluctantly, but then he got used to him, occasionally went carousing with him, and gave him money in the guise of loans.
Though they were all going with him, Anatole evidently wanted to make something touching and solemn out of this address to his friends. He spoke in a slow, loud voice and, thrusting out his chest, moved one leg forward.
The squadron overtook the infantry and artillery, which also speeded up, went down a hill and, passing through some empty, deserted village, rode uphill again. The horses began to lather, the men’s faces became flushed.
“All right,” said Pierre, looking at Dolokhov, who, holding the bottle of rum in his hand, was approaching the window, through which the light of the sky could be seen and the glow of morning and evening merging in it.
The general who was a member of the Hofkriegsrath looked at him sternly; but, noticing the seriousness of the stupid smile, could not refuse it a moment’s attention. He narrowed his eyes, showing that he was listening.
“No, I was joking, Pelageyushka,” said Pierre. “Princesse, ma parole, je n’ai pas voulu l’offenser, *325 I just said it. Never mind, I meant it as a joke,” he said, smiling timidly and wishing to smooth over his guilt.
“Right you are!” said the officers. “The soldiers must be overjoyed!” Denisov rode a little behind the hussars, accompanied by two infantry officers with whom he was talking about something. Rostov walked towards them.
“And far be it from us to fight the French, Prince!” said Count Rastopchin. “How can we oppose our teachers and gods? Look at our youth, look at our ladies. The French are our gods, and our kingdom of heaven is Paris.”
“The execution of the duc d’Enghien,” said Pierre, “was a necessity of state; and I precisely see greatness of soul in the fact that Napoleon was not afraid to take upon himself alone the responsibility for this act.”
She suddenly jumped up onto a tub, becoming taller than he, embraced him with her thin, bare arms, which bent higher than his neck, and, tossing her hair back with a movement of the head, kissed him right on the lips.
And she kissed her on the head. Sonya got up, the kitten revived, its eyes sparkled, and it seemed ready to raise its tail any moment, spring up on its soft paws, and play with a ball of yarn, as a kitten ought to do.
Striking his horse with his long, muscular legs, as if it was all the horse’s fault, the colonel moved forward and commanded the second squadron, the one in which Rostov served under Denisov, to go back to the bridge.
“Because not everything goes as it’s supposed to, and with such regularity as on parade. We planned, as I told you, to attack their rear by seven in the morning, but we didn’t even get there by five in the afternoon.”
“There, there—do you feel it? It’s so strange. And you know, Marie, I’ll love him very much,” said Liza, looking at her sister-in-law with shining, happy eyes. Princess Marya could not raise her head: she was weeping.
Anatole Kuragin was living in Moscow because his father had sent him away from Petersburg, where he spent over twenty thousand a year in cash and the same amount in debts, which his creditors demanded from his father.
Nesvitsky turned and saw, fifteen paces away, separated from him by the living mass of moving infantry, red, black, disheveled, his peaked cap pushed back, his dolman thrown dashingly over his shoulder—Vaska Denisov.
“What’s it all about? It’s about the French having crossed the bridge defended by Auersperg, and the bridge wasn’t blown up, so Murat is now racing down the road to Br&#252;nn, and they’ll be here today or tomorrow.”
Rostov himself, flinging his legs back, drawing his stomach in, and feeling himself one piece with his horse, with a frowning but blissful face, like the “very devil,” as Denisov used to say, rode past the sovereign.
“I tell you for the last time: turn all your attention to yourself, lay chains upon your feelings, and seek blessedness not in passions, but in your own heart…The source of blessedness is not outside, but inside us…”
The person to whom Anna Pavlovna treated her guests as a novelty that evening was Boris Drubetskoy, who had just come as a courier from the Prussian army, where he was an adjutant attached to a very important person.
“No, you know, I don’t believe we were in animals,” Natasha said in the same whisper, though the music had stopped. “I know for certain that we were angels somewhere, and visited here, and so we remember everything…”
But the sovereign and Balashov went out, without noticing Arakcheev, through the door leading to the lighted garden. Arakcheev, holding his sword and looking around spitefully, followed some twenty paces behind them.
That whole day and the next, Rostov’s friends and comrades noticed that he was not dull, not angry, but silent, pensive, and concentrated. He drank reluctantly, tried to stay alone, and kept thinking about something.
“I’d like to ask,” said the viscount, “how monsieur  explains the eighteenth Brumaire.18 Was that not a deception? C’est un escamotage, qui ne ressemble nullement &#224; la mani&#232;re d’agir d’un grand homme. ”†60
“Rubbish!” he shouted so that the veins swelled like ropes on his neck and forehead. “You’ve lost your mind, I tell you, I won’t stand for it. The purse is here; I’ll skin this scoundrel alive, and it will be here.”
“I’ve been sent back to the regiment again on account of this devil, this Mack. An Austrian general made a complaint. I congratulated him on Mack’s arrival…What’s with you, Rostov, come straight from the bathhouse?”
Rostov was very happy in the love that was shown him, but the first moment of their meeting had been so blissful that his present happiness seemed too little to him, and he kept waiting for more, and more, and more.
Soon after that, it was not the rhetor who came into the dark temple for Pierre, but his sponsor Willarski, whom he recognized by his voice. To renewed questions about the firmness of his intentions, Pierre replied:
“What’s that?” he said crossly, and his hand carelessly twitched, pouring an extra number of drops from the vial into the glass. He dumped the medicine on the floor and asked for more water. The maid gave it to him.
“What are you bothering me for? Eh?” shouted Denisov, suddenly flaring up. “I’m the one who’ll answer for it, not you, so stop buzzing around here while you’re still in one piece. March!” he shouted at the officers.
“It’s ready, miss,” said the maid, lifting the taken-up gauze dress with two fingers, and shaking it and blowing at something, showing by this gesture an awareness of the airiness and purity of what she was holding.
The old count, who had always maintained an enormous hunt, having now handed the whole hunt over to his son’s keeping, on that day of the fifteenth of September, feeling quite cheered up, made ready to go with them.
Though Prince Vassily listened to the elderly lady reluctantly and almost impolitely, and even showed impatience, she smiled at him gently and touchingly, and even took him by the arm to keep him from walking away.
“I also keep arguing with your husband. I don’t understand why he wants to go to the war,” said Pierre, without any constraint (so usual in the relations of a young man with a young woman), turning to the princess.
“A fine one, to say the least! a fine lad!…His father’s lying on his deathbed, and he’s having fun, sitting a policeman on the back of a bear! Shame on you, old boy, shame on you! You’d do better to go to the war.”
“No, dear heart,” spoke a pleasant voice, which seemed familiar to Prince Andrei, “I say that if it were possible to know what there will be after death, none of us would be afraid of death. That’s so, dear heart.”
As fresh air from the fields suddenly breathes through an open window into a stuffy room, so youth, energy, and certainty of success breathed upon Kutuzov’s cheerless staff as these brilliant young men galloped up.
“And do you remember,” Natasha said with a pensive smile, “how long, long ago, when we were still very little, our uncle called us to his study, in his old house, and it was dark—we came, and suddenly there stood…”
H&#233;l&#232;ne’s box was filled and surrounded on the parterre side by the most well-born and intelligent men, who seemed to vie with one another in their wish to show everyone that they were acquainted with her.
“The same hours, and the strolls in the avenues? The lathe?” asked Prince Andrei with a barely perceptible smile, which showed that, despite all his love and respect for his father, he was aware of his weaknesses.
“However, it seems nobody noticed,” Rostov thought to himself. And indeed no one had noticed anything, because they were all familiar with the feeling a junker experiences when he is under fire for the first time.
And the two friends began telling each other—the one about his hussar carousing and life at the front, the other about the pleasures and advantages of serving under the command of highly placed persons, and so on.
“Hardly,” said Bagration. “I saw them on that knoll this evening; if they had left, they would have pulled out from there as well. Officer,” Prince Bagration turned to Rostov, “are his pickets still posted there?”
When Pierre left and all the members of the family came together, they began to discuss him, as always happens after the departure of a new person, and, as rarely happens, they all said only good things about him.
On the thirteenth of June, the French and Russian emperors met at Tilsit.25 Boris Drubetskoy asked the important person to whom he was attached that he be included in the suite appointed to be stationed in Tilsit.
During the initial time of his stay in Petersburg, Prince Andrei felt that his whole way of thinking, developed in his solitary life, was completely overshadowed by the petty cares that consumed him in Petersburg.
“Speak, mama, why are you silent? Speak,” she said, glancing at her mother, who was looking at her daughter with a tender gaze and, while contemplating her like that, seemed to forget everything she wanted to say.
“Stop joking. I wanted to talk seriously with you. You know, I’m displeased with your younger son. Just between us,” her face acquired a sad look, “there was talk about him at her majesty’s, and you were pitied…”
“Hurra-a-ah!” the prolonged cry spread throughout our line, and, outstripping Prince Bagration and each other, in a disorderly but cheerful and lively crowd, our men ran down the hill after the disordered French.
Denisov bent over her hand, and she heard strange, incomprehensible sounds. She kissed him on his black, tousled, curly head. At that moment there was a hasty rustle of the countess’s skirts. She went up to them.
“So there is what and whom to be sorry for—human dignity, peace of conscience, purity, and not their backs and heads, which, however much you whip them and shave them, will still remain the same backs and heads.”
“First of all, Trunila’s not a dog, he’s a bloodhound,” thought Nikolai, and he glanced sternly at his sister, trying to make her feel the distance that should separate them at that moment. Natasha understood it.
“Yes,” said Nikolai. I remember that I came to you later and wanted to comfort you, and, you know, I was ashamed. We were terribly funny. I had a little toy figure then, and I wanted to give it to you. Remember?”
That same night, having repectfully taken leave of the minister of war, Bolkonsky rode off to the army, not knowing himself where he would find it and fearing to be intercepted by the French on his way to Krems.
“Et bien, et vous restez comme vous &#234;tes, ch&#232;re princesse?”  she said. “On va venir annoncer que ces messieurs sont au salon; il faudra descendre, et vous ne faites pas un petit brin de toilette!” †240
“But nothing, nothing like this…has ever happened to me before!” she said. “Only I’m frightened, I’m always frightened with him—what does it mean? It means it’s something real, doesn’t it? Mama, are you asleep?”
Prince Ippolit hastily put on his redingote, which, in the new style, hung lower than his heels, and, tangling himself in it, ran to the porch after the princess, whom the footman was helping into the carriage.
The princess was about to get up, but the prince held her by the arm. The princess had the air of someone who has suddenly become disappointed in the whole human race; she looked spitefully at her interlocutor.
At that moment the door, that awful door at which Pierre had stared for so long and which had opened so softly, now opened noisily, banging against the wall, and the younger princess ran out clasping her hands.
“Ah! ch&#232;re!…Ah! Marie!…”  the two women suddenly began to speak and then laughed. “J’ai rev&#233; cette nuit…” “Vous ne nous attendiez donc pas?…” “Ah, Marie, vous avez maigri…” “Et vous avez repris…” *158
The son sighed, admitting by this sigh that his father had understood him. The old man, continuing to fold and seal letters with his habitual dexterity, kept snatching up and throwing down wax, seal, and paper.
“Well, that ends that, my dear. Very glad to see you, very glad to see you. Go to your room, Princess, go,” said the old prince. “Very, very glad to see you,” he repeated, putting his arm around Prince Vassily.
“He was heard at the council of war and will be heard when he talks to the point; but to drag our feet and wait for something now, when Bonaparte is afraid of a general battle more than anything—is impossible.”
“Very good, very good,” he said to Prince Andrei and turned to a general who stood there with a watch in his hand, saying it was time to move on, because all the columns of the left flank had already descended.
All the faces in the sovereign’s suite instantly exchanged glances with each other, expressing murmur and reproach. “Old as he may be, he should not, he simply should not speak that way,” these faces expressed.
“One more question, Count,” he said, “which I ask you to answer not as a future Mason, but as an honest man (galant homme),  in all sincerity: have you renounced your former convictions, do you believe in God?”
It was so bright that he could see the harness plates gleaming in the moonlight and the eyes of the horses glancing fearfully at their passengers, who were making a great noise under the dark roof of the porch.
Two witnesses—Khvostikov, a former clerk, whom Dolokhov made use of for gambling, and Makarin, a retired hussar, a kind-hearted and weak man, who had a boundless love for Kuragin—sat in the front room over tea.
The coachman jumped down to hold the horses by the bridle, Anatole and Dolokhov went off down the sidewalk. Coming to the back gate, Dolokhov whistled. A whistle answered him, and following that a maid ran out.
“I’m by no means saying that all the plans are good,” said Prince Andrei, “only I can’t understand how you can make such a judgment about Bonaparte. Laugh all you like, but Bonaparte is still a great general!”
“What is it? What’s wrong?” asked both princesses, seeing Prince Andrei and the momentarily emerging figure of the old man in a white smock, wigless, and in an old man’s spectacles, shouting in an angry voice.
“Make a couple of marches with a pack on your back, your fancy trim will turn shabby,” the infantryman said, wiping the mud from his face with his sleeve, “or maybe it’s not a man but a bird perched up there!”
Bilibin and “ours” burst out laughing, looking Ippolit in the eye. Prince Andrei saw that this Ippolit, of whom he (it had to be admitted) had almost been jealous over his wife, was the buffoon of the company.
“Add two more notches and it’ll be just right,” he shouted in a high-pitched voice, trying to give it a dashing sound, which did not go with his little figure. “Number two,” he squeaked. “Smash ’em, Medvedev!”
Having reached the troops of the left flank, he did not ride forward, where the shooting was, but went looking for the general and the officers where they could not be, and therefore did not deliver the order.
Sonya was more devoted and tender to him than ever. It was as if she wanted to show him that his loss at cards was a feat which made her love him still more; but Nikolai now considered himself unworthy of her.
“Quant &#224; celui qui a conseill&#233; ce camp, le camp de Drissa,”  Paulucci was saying at the moment when the sovereign, going up the steps and noticing Prince Andrei, began peering at the unfamiliar face.
Sonya could not speak any more and again hid her head in her hands and in the featherbed. Natasha began to calm down, but it was clear from her face that she realized all the importance of her friend’s grief.
Bagration looked over his suite with his big, expressionless, sleepy eyes, and Rostov’s childlike face, involuntarily transfixed with excitement and hope, was the first thing that struck his eye. He sent him.
“That’s nonsense, silliness, rubbish,” said Nikolai, and thought: “How lovely my Natasha is! I have no other friend like her and never will. Why is she getting married? We could keep driving around together!”
“Dear Natalie,” said Princess Marya, “please know that I am glad my brother has found happiness…” She stopped, feeling that she was saying an untruth. Natasha noticed this pause and guessed the reason for it.
Mlle George, with bared, fat, dimpled arms, wearing a red shawl over one shoulder, came out into the empty space left for her among the chairs and stopped in an unnatural pose. Rapturous whispering was heard.
“When will the countess come, she’s got me completely worn out. You watch yourself, don’t tell her everything,” she turned to Pierre. “One doesn’t have the heart to scold her, she’s so pathetic, so pathetic!”
There are two sides to each man’s life: his personal life, which is the more free the more abstract its interests, and his elemental, swarmlike life, where man inevitably fulfills the laws prescribed for him.
“Annette, for God’s sake, don’t refuse me,” the countess said suddenly, blushing, which was quite strange with her thin, dignified, and no longer young face, and taking the money from under the handkerchief.
The squadron crossed the bridge and moved out of the range of fire without losing a single man. After them the second squadron, forming a line, also crossed, and the last Cossacks cleared off from that side.
“Trifles!” the colonel boomed. “Two hussars wounded and one killed on the spot, ” he said with obvious joy, unable to hold back a happy smile, sonorously rapping out the beautiful phrase killed on the spot.
“But you’re still afraid,” the first, familiar voice went on. “Afraid of the unknown, that’s what. However much we say that the soul will go to heaven…we know that there is no heaven, but only atmosphere.”18
A month and a half later he was married and settled down, as they say, the happy possessor of a beautiful wife and millions of roubles, in the big, newly done-over house of the counts Bezukhov in Petersburg.
“Where is it, that lofty sky, which I never knew till now and saw today?” was his first thought. “And I never knew this suffering either,” he thought. “Yes, I knew nothing, nothing till now. But where am I?”
“No, I’ll do it, only teach me how. Everything’s so easy for you,” she added, responding to her smile. “If you’d seen how he said it to me! Oh, I know he didn’t want to say it, but just said it by accident.”
“Who looks after the patients here?” he asked the assistant. Just then a commissariat soldier, a hospital attendant, came out of the next room and, stamping his feet, snapped to attention in front of Rostov.
Mitenka’s wife and sisters-in-law stuck their frightened faces into the front hall from the door to their room, where a clean samovar was boiling and the steward’s bed rose up high under its patchwork quilt.
“I won’t believe anyone: I know she doesn’t love me,” Natasha said boldly, taking the letter, and her face showed a dry and spiteful resolution that made Marya Dmitrievna look at her more intently and frown.
“Educate this bear for me,” he said. “He’s been living with me for a month, and this is the first time I’ve seen him in society. Nothing is so necessary for a young man as the company of intelligent women.”
“You don’t know, Bolkonsky,” Bilibin turned to Prince Andrei, “that all the horrors of the French army (I almost said the Russian army) are nothing compared to what this man has been doing among the women.”
“Vous savez, que je suis accabl&#233; d’affaires et que ce n’est pas que par pure charit&#233;, que je m’occupe de vous, et puis vous savez bien que ce que je vous propose est la seule chose faisable.” *224
The handsome young emperor Alexander, in the uniform of the horse guards, in a triangular hat, worn brim first, with his pleasant face and sonorous but not loud voice, attracted the full force of attention.
“Then what are you doing here? You should have gone ahead long ago; now you won’t get through till evening. Such stupid orders; they don’t know what they’re doing themselves,” the officer said and rode off.
“Mon p&#232;re—Andr&#233;?”  said the graceless, awkward princess, with such an inexpressible loveliness of sorrow and self-forgetfulness that her father could not endure her gaze and, sobbing, turned away.
Our army, after repeated retreats, advances, and battles around Pultusk and Preussisch-Eylau, was concentrated near Bartenstein. It was awaiting the arrival of the sovereign and the start of a new campaign.
“And for that alone the state has paid millions!” he said. “We want to give new judicial powers to the senate, but we have no laws. Which is why it’s a sin, Prince, for people such as you not to serve now.”
But from fatigue or lack of sleep, the day was not good for work, and Prince Andrei could do nothing, kept criticizing his own efforts, as often happened with him, and was glad when he heard someone arrive.
“And can you do it?” Natasha asked. The uncle smiled without answering. “Go, Anisyushka, see whether my guitar has all its strings or not. Haven’t set hand to it for a long time, right you are! Gave it up.”
“She gave a start in just the same way, came over in just the same way, and smiled timidly when it happened before,” thought Natasha, “and in just the same way…I thought there was something lacking in her.”
After Russian dances and singing, Pelageya Danilovna joined all the servants and masters together in one big circle; they brought a ring, a piece of string, and a one-rouble coin, and played games together.
A French hussar under-officer in a raspberry-colored uniform and shaggy hat shouted to the approaching Balashov, ordering him to stop. Balashov did not stop at once, but went on moving slowly down the road.
The princess, picking up her dress, was settling herself in the darkness of the carriage; her husband was straightening his sword; Prince Ippolit, on the pretext of being of service, got in everyone’s way.
“What is this? like sheep! just like sheep! Away!…clear the road! Wait, you there! you with the cart, you devil! I’ll take my sword to you!” he shouted, actually drawing his saber and beginning to wave it.
After Zherkov, an officer of the suite rode up to the hussar colonel with the same order. After the officer of the suite, on a Cossack horse that was barely able to gallop under him, fat Nesvitsky rode up.
“Here’s where our battery stands,” said the staff officer, indicating the highest point, “the one of that odd bird who was sitting there without boots. You can see everything from there: let’s go, Prince.”
“Rotten! but that’s not the point. My friend,” said Dolokhov in a halting voice, “where are we? We’re in Moscow, I know. Never mind me, but I’ve killed her, killed…She won’t survive it. She won’t survive…”
Late at night, the Rostovs’ four vehicles drove into Marya Dmitrievna’s courtyard on Old Konyushennaya Street. Marya Dmitrievna lived alone. Her daughter was already married. Her sons were all in the army.
“So, Sonya, here you were saying all kinds of stupid things about him,” Natasha began in a meek voice, the sort of voice in which children speak when they want to be praised. “He and I had a talk tonight.”
Natasha did not speak with Sonya anymore and avoided her. With the same expression of agitated surprise and criminality, she paced the rooms, taking up one thing, then another, and abandoning them at once.
“Yes, a ball of fire,” said the count. “She takes after me! And what a voice! Though she’s my daughter, I’ll tell you the truth: she’ll be a singer, another Salomoni. We’ve hired an Italian to teach her.”
“Very sorry you didn’t find me in yesterday. I spent the whole day fussing about with the Germans. Went to see Weyrother to check the disposition. When Germans start being accurate, there’s no end to it!”
Towards evening he stopped moaning and became completely still. He did not know how long he was unconscious. Suddenly he felt himself alive again and suffering from a burning and rending pain in the head.
Natasha fell in love from the moment she entered the ballroom. She was not in love with anyone in particular, but with everyone. She fell in love with whomever she looked at, the moment she looked at him.
“Mon cher, avec nos cinq cent mille hommes de troupes, il serait facile d’avoir un beau style,” †362 said Count Rastopchin. Pierre understood why Count Rastopchin was disturbed by the wording of the note.
The princess made no reply, did not even smile, and left at once. Anna Mikhailovna took off her gloves and settled into a hard-won position in an armchair, inviting Prince Vassily to sit down beside her.
“On the contrary,” said the prince, now plainly out of sorts. “Je serais tr&#232;s content si vous me d&#233;barassez de ce jeune homme… *103 He just sits here. The count has never once asked about him.”
“Look, he’s puffing away again,” Tushin said to himself in a whisper, as a puff of smoke leaped from the hillside and was borne leftwards in a strip by the wind, “now wait for the ball—and send it back.”
“Your Excellency, shouldn’t we send for Marya Bogdanovna?” asked one of the maids. (Marya Bogdanovna was a midwife from the provincial capital, who had already been living at Bald Hills for over a week.)
“Il faut distinguer entre le cabinet de Vienne et l’Empereur d’Autriche,”  said Mortemart. “L’Empereur d’Autriche n’a jamais pu penser &#224; une chose pareille, ce n’est que le cabinet qui le dit.” ‡300
“Those are Masha’s people of God,” said Prince Andrei. “They took us for father. And this is the only thing in which she doesn’t obey him: he orders these wanderers19 driven away, but she receives them.”
On December 31, the eve of the new year 1810, for le r&#233;veillon, *345 a ball was given by a grand dignitary of Catherine’s time. The ball was to be attended by the diplomatic corps and the sovereign.
All this was tended, gathered, and cooked by Anisya Fyodorovna. All this smelled, and spoke, and had the taste of Anisya Fyodorovna. It all spoke of juiciness, cleanness, whiteness, and a pleasant smile.
“Yes, very often. And do you know the new way of courting?” Pierre said with a merry smile, clearly being in that merry mood of good-natured mockery for which he reproached himself so often in his diary.
Opening the door to the reception room, Pierre saw Natasha sitting by the window with a thin, pale, and spiteful face. She glanced at him, frowned, and, with an expression of cold dignity, left the room.
Their every action, which to them seems willed by themselves, in the historical sense is not willed, but happens in connection with the whole course of history and has been destined from before all ages.
“Mon cher,  you can’t go saying what you think everywhere. Well, so, have you finally decided on anything? Are you going to be a horse guard or a diplomat?” Prince Andrei asked after a moment’s silence.
“Mais tr&#232;s brave homme, mon prince,” †99 observed Anna Mikhailovna, smiling touchingly, as though she, too, knew that Count Rostov deserved such an opinion, but begged for pity on the poor old man.
As her animation increased, the prince looked at her more and more sternly, and suddenly, as if he had studied her enough and arrived at a clear idea of her, turned away and addressed Mikhail Ivanovich.
“Something special is said on these occasions,” he thought, but he simply could not remember precisely what was said on these occasions. He looked at her face. She moved closer to him. Her face blushed.
“Taisez-vous, mauvaise langue,” *263 said Dolgorukov. “It’s not true, there are now two Russians: Miloradovich and Dokhturov, and there would have been a third, Count Arakcheev, but he has weak nerves.”
“Devil knows about them! He’s beaten everybody! Perish them all!” answers came in Russian, German, and Czech from the crowds of fleeing men who, like himself, did not understand what was going on there.
“I have the pleasure of speaking with Count Bezukhov, if I’m not mistaken,” the traveler said unhurriedly and loudly. Pierre looked silently and questioningly at his interlocutor through his spectacles.
“Only not late, Count, if I may ask; around ten minutes to eight, if I may ask. We’ll have a game of cards. Our general will join us. He’s very kind to me. We’ll have supper, Count. So do me the favor.”
When Ilagin took leave of Nikolai in the evening, Nikolai was so far from home that he accepted his uncle’s offer to quit the hunt and spend the night with him (the uncle) in his village of Mikhailovka.
“Have you heard anything about the Rostovs?” she asked in order to change the conversation. “I was told they would be here soon. I also expect Andr&#233; any day. I wish they could see each other here.”
And with the resolution and tenderness that occur in moments of awakening, she embraced her friend. But, noticing the embarrassment on Sonya’s face, Natasha’s face expressed embarrassment and suspicion.
“Yes, you’re close friends with Bolkonsky, she probably wants you to tell him something. Ah, my God, my God! Everything was so nice!” And, clutching at his sparse gray whiskers, the count left the room.
“Eh bien, vous ne dites rien, admirateur et courtisan de l’Empereur Alexandre?” †415 he said, as if it was ridiculous in his presence to be anyone else’s courtisan  and admirateur  than his, Napoleon’s.
Here Prince Ippolit snorted and guffawed, far in advance of his listeners, which produced an impression unfavorable to the narrator. Many smiled, however, the elderly lady and Anna Pavlovna among them.
“Je suis un homme fini,” *79 said Prince Andrei. “Why talk about me? Let’s talk about you,” he said, pausing and smiling at his comforting thoughts. This smile was instantly reflected on Pierre’s face.
“Non, non, de gr&#226;ce…Vous &#234;tes Mlle Bourienne, je vous connais d&#233;j&#224; par l’amiti&#233; que vous porte ma belle-soeur,”  said the princess, kissing her. “Elle ne nous attend pas!” §157
To the right Rostov saw the first rows of his hussars, and still further ahead he could see a dark strip, which he could not make out but thought to be the enemy. Shots were fired, but in the distance.
“I told you, it’s all bumps and hollows,” the little princess repeated. “I’d be glad to fall asleep myself, so it’s not my fault.” And her voice quavered, like the voice of a child who is about to cry.
“Since Prince Bagration won’t be coming, we can begin,” said Weyrother, hurriedly getting up from his place and approaching the table, on which an enormous map of the environs of Br&#252;nn was spread.
Natasha pulled him down to her and kissed his face all over, then jumped back and, holding the skirt of his Hungarian jacket, hopped up and down in one place like a little goat and shrieked piercingly.
“Natalya Ilyinichna,” Pierre began, lowering his eyes and feeling pity for her and loathing for the operation he had to perform, “it should make no difference to you whether it’s true or not, because…”
“J’esp&#232;re enfin,”  Anna Pavlovna continued, “que &#231;a a &#233;t&#233; la goutte d’eau qui fera d&#233;border le verre. Les souverains ne peuvent plus supporter cet homme, qui menace tout.” *51
“A limit has been set,” said a little old man, a clerical person, to a lady who sat down beside him and listened to him na&#239;vely, “a limit has been set to human life, which cannot be overstepped.”
When Prince Andrei went into the study, the old prince, in his old man’s spectacles and his white smock, in which he received no one except his son, was sitting at the table and writing. He looked up.
“It must be the work of Vinesse,”2 said Pierre, naming a famous miniaturist, leaning towards the table in order to take the snuffbox in his hands, and listening to the conversation at the other table.
“How understand!” her father cried irately. “Prince Vassily finds you to his taste as his daughter-in-law and proposes to you on behalf of his pupil. That’s how! How understand?! And I am asking you.”
“Ah, here he is at last!” cried Rostov. “And Berg’s here, too! Ah, you petisenfan, allay cushay dormir! ”*260 he cried, repeating the words of their nanny, at whom he and Boris used to laugh together.
The next day the troops set out on the march, and Boris had no time up to the battle of Austerlitz itself to visit either Bolkonsky or Dolgorukov and remained for a time with the Izmailovsky regiment.
Dolokhov gravely began to deal. Oh, how Rostov hated at that moment those reddish hands, with their short fingers and the hair sticking out from the cuffs, which had him in their power…He won the ten.
“Still the same, just wait, for God’s sake. Karl Ivanych always says that sleep is best of all,” Princess Marya whispered with a sigh. Prince Andrei went over to the baby and felt him. He was burning.
“They offered him other lands in place of the dukedom of Oldenburg,” said Prince Nikolai Andreich. “He moves dukes around the way I move peasants from Bald Hills to Bogucharovo and my Ryazan estates.”
“I read our protest about the Oldenburg affair and was astonished at the poor wording of this note,” Count Rastopchin said in the careless tone of a man judging a matter that was very familiar to him.
“Listen to me, I’m saying it to you for the last time. Why would I joke with you? Did I thwart you? Who arranged everything, who found the priest, who ordered the passport, who got the money? All me.”
Marya Dmitrievna, finding the weeping Sonya in the corridor, had made her confess everything. Having intercepted Natasha’s note and read it, Marya Dmitrievna went to Natasha with the note in her hand.
“It makes no difference,” Marya Dmitrievna went on. “So they’ll find out, and what then, will they leave it at that? I know your father, he’ll challenge him to a duel. Won’t that be a fine thing? Eh?”
“It’s modern upbringing! While still abroad,” the guest went on, “this young man was left to himself, and now in Petersburg, they say, he did such awful things that he’s been banished by the police.”
“Yes, nice, nice children,” agreed the count, who always resolved all tangled questions by finding everything nice. “Just look at him! Decided to be a hussar! Well, what do you want, ma ch&#232;re !”
The second princess came out of the sick man’s room with tearful eyes and sat down next to Dr. Lorrain, who was sitting in a graceful pose under a portrait of Catherine, leaning his elbow on a table.
The regiment broke up into companies and dispersed to their assigned quarters not far from Braunau, where they hoped to find footgear, mend their clothes, and get some rest after their hard marching.
“He’s all right, a good horse,” replied Rostov, although the horse, which he had bought for seven hundred rubles, was not worth even half that price. “He’s begun to favor the left foreleg…” he added.
The conversation did not flag all evening, turning mostly around political news. At the end of the evening it became especially lively when things got around to the rewards bestowed by the sovereign.
He still had the letters in his hand. He opened them mechanically and began to read. On blue paper, in his large, elongated hand, occasionally using abbreviations, the old prince wrote the following:
“Let’s go, let’s go!” Rostov said hastily, and, lowering his eyes and shrinking, he tried to pass unnoticed through the line of those reproachful and envious eyes directed at him as he left the room.
“No, go home,” said Marya Dmitrievna. “And wait there. If her fianc&#233; comes here now, there’ll be no avoiding a quarrel, and here he can talk it over alone with the old man and then come to you.”
“Princess Drubetskoy to see Prince Vassily Sergeevich,” he called out to the servant in stockings, shoes, and a tailcoat, who had come running down and was now peering from the turn of the stairway.
“Well, how’s my Cossack?” (Marya Dmitrievna called Natasha a Cossack), she said, caressing Natasha, who came up to kiss her hand fearlessly and merrily. “I know she’s a wicked girl, but I love her.”
“Well, that’s it, that’s it,” the general said angrily, taking the glass from his eye and shrugging his shoulders, “that’s it, they’re going to fire on the crossing. And what are they dawdling for?”
“Ah, what a swine I am, though, that I didn’t write even once and frightened them so. Ah, what a swine I am!” he repeated, suddenly blushing. “So send Gavrilo for wine! Let’s have a drink!” he said.
“De beaux hommes!” *271 said Napoleon, looking at a dead Russian grenadier who, his face buried in the ground and his nape blackened, lay on his stomach, one of his already stiff arms flung far out.
“I’ll go anywhere the countess orders me to!” said Denisov, who had jokingly placed himself on the footing of Natasha’s knight in the Rostovs’ house. “I’m ready to dance the pas de ch&#226;le. ”*287
After Denisov’s departure, Rostov, waiting for the money, which the old count could not raise all at once, spent two more weeks in Moscow without leaving the house, mostly in the young ladies’ room.
The head steward expressed great sympathy with Pierre’s intentions; but he observed that, besides these transformations, it was generally necessary to take care of things, which were in a bad state.
As in his first meeting with him at Kochubey’s, Speransky also made a strong impression on Bolkonsky that Wednesday at home, where he received him alone and talked with him at length and trustfully.
He saw the whippers-in in their red hats riding along the edge of the overgrown ravine; he even saw the dogs, and expected every second that a fox would appear on the other side, on the green field.
“And do you remember how we were rolling eggs in the reception room and suddenly there were two old women, and they started twirling on the carpet. Did that happen or not? Remember how good it was…”
Pierre sniffed silently, looking at her. Up to then he had reproached her in his soul and had tried to despise her; but now he felt such pity for her that there was no room in his soul for reproach.
“Vera,” said the countess, turning to her older daughter, obviously not her favorite. “How is it you have no notion of anything? Can’t you feel that you’re not needed here? Go to your sisters, or…”
“And it must seem to you,” Boris said, blushing slightly, but without changing his voice or pose, “it must seem to you that all everyone is concerned with is getting something out of the rich man.”
“Yes, I’ve come to see you, papa, and with a pregnant wife,” said Prince Andrei, his animated and respectful eyes following the movement of every feature of his father’s face. “How is your health?”
When Rostov came back, there was a bottle of vodka and some sausage on the table. Denisov was sitting at the table scratching on a piece of paper with his quill. He glanced darkly at Rostov’s face.
“As soon as I saw that the first battalion was in disorder, Your Excellency, I stood there on the road and thought: ‘I’ll let them pass and then meet them with ranged fire,’ and that’s what I did.”
“What a brave fellow we’ve got here! Well, answer, what is this duel? What did you want to prove by it? What, I ask you.” Pierre shifted heavily on the sofa, opened his mouth, but could not answer.
“But the doctor hasn’t come from Moscow yet,” said the princess. (At the wishes of Liza and Prince Andrei, they had sent to Moscow in due time for an accoucheur, and he was expected at any moment.)
“No, excuse me, I won’t go now, not until the baby gets well,” he thought and, going to the door, he peeked into the nursery. Princess Marya was still standing by the crib, gently rocking the baby.
“I wrote a decision on your memorandum and it was passed on to the committee. I do not  approve,” said Arakcheev, getting up and taking a paper from his desk. “Here,” he handed it to Prince Andrei.
“We’re going,” Nikolai answered reluctantly, being intent on some serious wolf hunting that day and not wanting to bring Natasha and Petya along. “We’re going, but only for wolves: you’d be bored.”
Paulucci and Michaud with two voices fell upon Wolzogen in French. Armfelt addressed Pfuel in German. Toll explained something to Volkonsky in Russian. Prince Andrei silently listened and observed.
The postilion touched up the horses, and the wheels of the carriage rumbled. Prince Ippolit laughed fitfully, standing on the porch and waiting for the viscount, whom he had promised to take home.
“Et savez-vous que vous &#234;tes terrible avec votre petit air innocent,”  the viscount continued. “Je plains le pauvre mari, ce petit officier, qui se donne des airs de prince r&#233;gnant.” †69
“However, ma ch&#232;re,  that was a nice stunt,” said the count and, noticing that the elder guest was not listening, he turned to the young ladies. “A fine figure that policeman cut, I imagine.”
And Natasha could say no more (everything seemed funny to her). She fell on her mother and burst into such loud and ringing laughter that everyone else, even the prim guest, laughed involuntarily.
“And I wished so much to thank Uncle  for all his benefactions to me and to Borya. C’est son filleul, ”*100 she added in such a tone, as though this news was to make Prince Vassily extremely glad.
“Catiche a fait donner du th&#233; dans le petit salon,”  Prince Vassily said to Anna Mikhailovna. “Allez, ma pauvre  Anna Mikhailovna, prenez quelque chose, autrement vous ne suffirez pas .” †137
“You think I’m an old man and don’t understand the real state of affairs,” he concluded. “But I have it all up here! I don’t sleep nights. So, where has this great general of yours shown himself?”
“Ma foi, sire, nous ferons ce que qui sera dans notre possibilit&#233;, sire!” *269 he replied merrily, nevertheless calling up mocking smiles among the gentlemen of the suite with his bad French.
“I…hope…for guidance…help…in my renewal,” Pierre said in a trembling voice and speaking with difficulty, owing to his excitement and to being unused to speaking about abstract subjects in Russian.
“As you wish—really…I think…but as you wish,” said Princess Marya, clearly abashed and ashamed that her opinion had triumphed. She pointed to the maid, who was calling to her brother in a whisper.
“If they had known that you wished it, the f&#234;te would have been cancelled,” said the prince, uttering out of habit, like a wound-up clock, things that he did not even wish people to believe.
“Believe me, Princess, I’ll do all I can,” replied Prince Vassily, “but it’s hard for me to ask the sovereign. I’d advise you to turn to Rumyantsev through Prince Golitsyn—that would be smarter.”
“The same hours, and the lathe, also mathematics, and my geometry lessons,” Princess Marya replied joyfully, as though her lessons in geometry were one of the most joyful impressions of her life.
She smiled as she pronounced the name Andryusha.  It must have been strange to her to think that this stern, handsome man was that same Andryusha, a thin, frolicsome boy, her childhood companion.
“Attack, indeed!” the colonel said in a bored voice, wincing as if a fly was pestering him. “And why are you standing here? You can see the flanks are retreating. Bring the squadron back across.”
“Tr&#232;s dr&#244;le, mon monsieur prince,” *222 said the staff officer on duty. (He remembered that there was some special way of addressing a prince in French, but was unable to get it right.)
Unfortunate as Mlle Bourienne’s choice of subject had been, she did not stop and babbled about the conservatory, about the beauty of a newly opened flower, and after the soup the prince relented.
“It’s not that I don’t remember him—I know how he is, but I don’t remember him the way I do Nikolenka. I close my eyes, and I remember him, but Boris I don’t” (she closed her eyes), “no—nothing!”
The sovereign heard, but this reply clearly did not please him; he shrugged his slightly stooping shoulders, glanced at Novosiltsev, who stood nearby, as if complaining of Kutuzov by this glance.
Nikolai Rostov experienced this blessedness to the full as he continued serving after 1807 in the Pavlogradsky regiment, where he was already a squadron commander, having taken over from Denisov.
“So this is how she is, and I’m a fool!” he thought, looking at her shining eyes and happy, rapturous smile, such as he had never seen before, which made dimples on her cheeks under the mustache.
“Ce n’est pas une histoire des revenants?” *39 he said, sitting down near the princess and hastily affixing a lorgnette to his eyes, as if he was unable to start talking without this instrument.
“No, do promise, do promise, Basile,” Anna Mikhailovna said behind him, with the smile of a young coquette, which must have suited her very well once, but now did not go with her emaciated face.
“No, that abb&#233; is very interesting, only he has the wrong notion of things…In my opinion, eternal peace is possible, but I don’t know how to say it…Only it’s not through political balance…”
Pierre, who was becoming more and more agitated during this conversation, got up and went over to the princess. He seemed unable to bear the sight of tears and was about to start crying himself.
“The thing is this,” she said significantly and also in a half whisper. “Count Kirill Vladimirovich’s reputation is well-known…He’s lost count of his children, but this Pierre was his favorite.”
“Mikhail Ivanovich!” the old prince cried to the architect, who, being busy with the roast, had hoped to be forgotten. “Didn’t I tell you Bonaparte was a great tactician? Well, he says so, too.”
“Who’s that running in the middle of the bridge? Keep to the right! Back, junker!” he cried out angrily and turned to Denisov, who, flaunting his courage, rode out onto the planks of the bridge.
“And I could be in his place!” Rostov thought to himself and, barely holding back tears of pity over the sovereign’s fate, rode on in complete despair, not knowing where he was going now or why.
Ahead of him walked Kutuzov’s groom, leading horses covered with cloths. Behind the groom came a wagon, and behind the wagon an old house serf in a peaked cap, a short coat, and with bandy legs.
“So you’re not afraid to gamble with me?” Dolokhov repeated, and, as if in order to tell a merry story, he set the cards down, leaned back in his chair, and, with a smile, slowly began to speak:
Pelageyushka paused mistrustfully, but Pierre’s face showed such sincere regret and Prince Andrei looked so meekly and gravely now at Pelageyushka, now at Pierre, that she gradually calmed down.
On the square to which the sovereign was riding there stood facing each other on the right the Preobrazhensky battalion and on the left the battalion of the French guards in their bearskin hats.
“Well, little countess, right you are!” the uncle said, laughing joyfully, finishing the dance. “What a niece! Now all we need is to choose you a fine young fellow for a husband, right you are!”
Sometime past nine a break, a droshky, and three mounted men came looking for Natasha and Petya. The count and countess did not know where they were and were very worried, as the messenger said.
“They’re talking about us, about me and him!” Natasha thought. “And he must be calming his fianc&#233;e’s jealousy of me. They needn’t worry! If only they knew how little I care about them all!”
“Makarka” (as they called Makarin) “is disinterested, he’ll go through fire and water for you. Well, there, that’s the end of the accounting,” said Dolokhov, showing him the note. “Is it right?”
“He said he had expected it,” she said. “I know his pride won’t allow him to express his feelings, but still he bore it better, much better, than I expected. Evidently this is how it had to be…”
“Ah! Count Rostov!” Pierre began joyfully. “So you’re his son Ilya? Can you imagine, I didn’t recognize you at first. Remember, we used to go to the Sparrow Hills with Madame Jacquot…long ago.”
“What is it?” the countess asked fearfully, but, seeing from her daughter’s face that it was a prank, she sternly waved her hand at her, making a threatening and negative gesture with her head.
They went up to the door of the sitting room, through which came the sounds of the same passage repeated again and again. Prince Andrei stopped and winced, as if expecting something unpleasant.
“Mercy, General, I wouldn’t be so bold!” replied the captain, his nose reddening, smiling and revealing with his smile the absence of his two front teeth, knocked out by a rifle butt at Izmail.
Rostov felt Denisov’s gaze on him, raised his eyes, and instantly lowered them. All the blood he had locked up somewhere under his throat rushed to his face and eyes. He could scarcely breathe.
And Pierre, trying fearfully to recall whether he had done anything reprehensible, blushed and looked around him. It seemed to him that everyone knew what had happened to him as well as he did.
“What? A minister? What minister? Who ordered it?” he began speaking in his piercingly harsh voice. “You didn’t clear it for the princess, my daughter, but for a minister! I have no ministers!”
“My wish, mon p&#232;re,  is never to leave you, never to separate my life from yours. I do not want to marry,” she said resolutely, her beautiful eyes looking at Prince Vassily and her father.
“I’m waiting, Your Majesty,” Kutuzov repeated (Prince Andrei noticed that Kutuzov’s upper lip twitched unnaturally as he said this “waiting”). “Not all the columns are assembled, Your Majesty.”
The accoucheur came in. Prince Andrei left, and, meeting Princess Marya, went up to her again. They spoke in whispers, but the conversation stopped every other minute. They waited and listened.
A moment later, Sonya came in, frightened, bewildered, and guilty. Nikolai went up to her and kissed her hand. It was the first time during his visit that they spoke alone and about their love.
“No, I must. Maybe it’s suffisance *288 on my part, but it’s still better to say everything. If you refused for my sake, I must tell you the whole truth. I love you, I think, more than anyone…”
The valet with the letters did not find the young prince in his study and went to Princess Marya’s side; but he was not there either. The valet was told that the prince had gone to the nursery.
“That one is the Dutch ambassador, see, the gray-haired one,” she said, pointing to a little old man with abundant, curly silver-gray hair, surrounded by ladies whom he made laugh at something.
“Go, go to him. He’s asking for your hand,” the countess said coldly, as it seemed to Natasha…“Go…go,” the mother said sadly and reproachfully after her running daughter, and she sighed deeply.
“I don’t find her so, looking at you,” said Anatole, following Natasha. He said it at a moment when she alone could hear him. “You’re lovely…from the moment I first saw you, I’ve never ceased…”
“Ah, judging!…judging!” the old man said in a low voice and, it seemed to Prince Andrei, with embarrassment, but then he suddenly jumped up and shouted: “Out, out! Don’t leave a trace behind!…”
“Adieu, Andr&#233;! Rappelez-vous que les malheurs viennent de Dieu, et que les hommes ne sont jamais coupables” *416 were the last words he heard from his sister as he was taking leave of her.
Anatole turned to the Englishman and, taking him by the button of his tailcoat and looking at him from above (the Englishman was short), began repeating the terms of the bet to him in English.
“Well, my little countess! what a saut&#233; au mad&#232;re  of hazel grouse we’ll have, ma ch&#232;re!  I sampled it. Not for nothing did I pay a thousand roubles for Taraska. He’s worth it!”
“God has nothing to do with it. Well, tell me,” he went on, getting back on his hobbyhorse, “how have the Germans taught you to fight Bonaparte by this new science of yours known as strategy?”
“Andr&#233;, si vous avez la foi, vous vous seriez adress&#233; &#224; Dieu, pour qu’il vous donne l’amour que vous ne sentez pas, et votre pri&#232;re aurait &#233;t&#233; exauc&#233;e.” *173
“Commander of the third company to the general! commander to the general, third company to the commander!…” voices were heard in the ranks, and an adjutant ran to look for the belated officer.
“I ask only one thing, Your Excellency,” he said in his firm, sonorous, unhurried voice. “I ask to be given a chance to wipe out my guilt and prove my devotion to the sovereign and to Russia.”
“Ah, really! And I blew everything last night, brother, like a son of a bitch!” shouted Denisov, swallowing his r ’s. “Such bad luck! Such bad luck!…As soon as you left, it started. Hey, tea!”
Rostov took the purse in his hands and looked at it, and at the money that was in it, and at Telyanin. The lieutenant glanced about, as was his habit, and suddenly seemed to become very merry.
“Oh, that makes no difference at all,” Dolgorukov began speaking quickly, getting up and unfolding a map on the table. “All the possibilities have been foreseen: if he’s camped by Br&#252;nn…”
Returning from his southern journey in the happiest state of mind, Pierre carried out a long-standing intention of his—to go and visit his friend Bolkonsky, whom he had not seen for two years.
Prince Andrei was becoming more and more animated. His eyes shone feverishly all the while he was trying to prove to Pierre that there never was any wish for his neighbor’s good in his action.
“The prince is not entirely well—la bile et le transport au cerveau. Tranquillisez-vous, je repasserai demain,” †360 said M&#233;tivier, and, putting his finger to his lips, he hurriedly left.
“All is lost?” he repeated. “If I were not I, but the handsomest, brightest, and best man in the world, and I was free, I would go on my knees this minute and ask for your hand and your love.”
Pierre, too, following her, almost ran out to the front hall, holding back the tears of tenderness and happiness that choked him, put on his coat, missing the sleeves, and got into the sleigh.
“I think,” the prince said, smiling, “that if they sent you instead of our dear Wintzingerode, you would take the Prussian king’s consent by storm.7 You’re so eloquent! Will you give me tea?”
“Wait, two more words. Une fois pass&#233; aux gardes… ”*48 She faltered. “You’re on good terms with Mikhail Ilarionovich Kutuzov, recommend Boris as his adjutant. Then I’ll be at peace and…”
“Here’s some Key to the Mystery 44 your H&#233;lo&#239;se sends you. Religious. But I don’t interfere with anyone’s beliefs…I’ve looked through it. Take it. Well, off with you, off with you!”
“So as I was saying to you, Andr&#233;, be kind and magnanimous, as you’ve always been. Don’t judge Lise too severely,” she began. “She’s so dear, so kind, and her position is very hard now.”
“Non, mais figurez-vous, la vieille comtesse Zouboff avec des fausses boucles et la bouche pleine de fausses dents, comme si elle voulait d&#233;fier les ann&#233;es… †175 Ha, ha, ha, Marie!”
“But Your Excellency knows the wise rule which prescribes that one should assume the worst,” said the Austrian general, evidently wishing to put an end to the joking and get down to business.
After the fatigues and impressions of the journey, the reception, and especially after dinner, Bolkonsky felt that he did not quite understand the full significance of the words he had heard.
“That’s just it,” Dolgorukov interrupted, laughing and speaking quickly. “You know Bilibin, he’s a very intelligent man, he suggested addressing him as ‘Usurper and Enemy of the Human Race.’”
“Believe me,” said Prince Dolgorukov, addressing Bagration, “this is nothing but a ruse: he has retreated and has ordered the rear guard to light fires and make noise in order to deceive us.”
“Soon now? Soon now? Oh, these unbearable streets, shops, bakeries, street lamps, cabbies!” thought Rostov, when they had already registered their leaves at the city gates and entered Moscow.
The footman Pyotr said something to the coachman; the coachman answered affirmatively. But evidently the coachman’s sympathy was not enough for Pyotr: he turned on the box towards his master.
But then, seeing her father and especially little Coco, her intention would weaken, she would weep in quiet and feel she was a sinful woman: she loved her father and her nephew more than God.
“Don’t cry, mama, only tell me that you want it, and you know I’ll give my whole life, everything, for you to be at peace,” said Nikolai. “I’ll sacrifice everything for you, even my feeling.”
Sonya did not remember much of what they remembered, and what she did remember did not evoke in her the poetic feeling they experienced. She only delighted in their joy, trying to imitate it.
On St. Nicholas’s day, the prince’s name day, all Moscow came to his door, but he gave orders to receive no one and to invite only a few to dinner, the list of whom he gave to Princess Marya.
Sonya would not yield to the tender tone in which Natasha addressed her. The more soft and ingratiating the expression of Natasha’s face was, the more serious and stern was the face of Sonya.
When the count came into her room, she anxiously turned at the sound of a man’s footsteps, and her face assumed its former cold and even angry expression. She did not even get up to meet him.
Pierre, without greeting his wife, whom he had not seen since his arrival (she was more hateful to him than ever at that moment), entered the drawing room and, seeing Anatole, went up to him.
“And why has the emperor Alexander taken charge of the army? What for? War is my trade, and his business is to rule, not to command troops. Why has he taken such responsibility upon himself?”
“I’m relying on you, my dear friend,” Anna Pavlovna said, also softly, “you’ll write to her and tell me comment le p&#232;re envisagera la chose. Au revoir .”†67 And she left the front hall.
“Allow me, Princess, to know what is and what is not necessary,” the younger woman was saying, evidently in the same agitated state she had been in when she had slammed the door to her room.
She led him to the dark drawing room, and Pierre was glad that nobody could see his face. Anna Mikhailovna left him, and when she came back, he was sound asleep, his head resting on his arm.
Everyone began running, hurrying, and Rostov saw behind him on the road several horsemen with white plumes in their hats riding up. In a single moment, everyone was in his place and waiting.
“Plans?” Prince Andrei repeated ironically. “My plans?” he repeated, as if astonished at the meaning of such a word. “As you see, I’m building, by next year I want to have moved completely…”
Without replying either to his wife or to his mother-in-law, Pierre got ready for the road late one night and left for Moscow to see Iosif Alexeevich. Here is what Pierre wrote in his diary:
The count and Semyon looked at him. Suddenly, as often happens, the sound of the chase instantly drew close, as if the dogs’ baying muzzles and Danilo’s hallooing were just in front of them.
He had barely ridden out beyond the projecting arm of the forest when he saw a fat gentleman in a visored beaver cap coming towards him on a beautiful black horse, accompanied by two grooms.
“Aren’t you cold?” he asked. They did not reply and burst out laughing. Dimmler shouted something from the sleigh behind, probably something funny, but it was impossible to hear what it was.
“Good-bye, dear heart—it’s always like a harp, listening to him!” said the old prince, holding him by the hand and offering him his cheek for a kiss. The others got up along with Rastopchin.
“But think what you’re doing,” said Sonya. “I can’t leave it like this. These secret letters…How could you let him go so far?” she said with a horror and revulsion she had difficulty hiding.
“On the contrary, Your Majesty,” said Balashov, barely managing to remember what had been told him and following with difficulty these verbal fireworks, “the troops are burning with desire…”
Prince Vassily always spoke lazily, the way an actor speaks a role in an old play. Anna Pavlovna Scherer, on the contrary, despite her forty years, was brimming with animation and impulses.
“Well, whom did you solicit for Borenka?” asked the countess. “Here your son is an officer in the guards, and Nikolushka is going as a junker.28 There’s no one to solicit. Who did you ask?”
Pierre smiled his kindly smile, as if fearing that his interlocutor might say something he would then regret. But Boris spoke distinctly, clearly, drily, looking Pierre straight in the eye.
“Moscow has nothing else to do but gossip,” he went on. “Everyone’s concerned about whom the count will leave his fortune to, though maybe he’ll outlive us all, which is my heartfelt wish…”
Coming out to the waiting room from Kutuzov’s office, Prince Andrei, holding the papers, went up to his colleague on duty, the adjutant Kozlovsky, who was sitting by the window with a book.
“The devil prompted me to go to that rat” (the officer’s nickname was “the Rat”), he said, rubbing his forehead and face with both hands. “Can you imagine, not a single good card, not one.”
“Adjutant! Mister Adjutant!…For God’s sake…protect us…What’s it all about?…I’m the wife of the doctor of the seventh chasseurs…they won’t let us pass; we couldn’t keep up, lost our people…”
“More, more, step it up!” he addressed these sounds mentally, and again started riding along the line, penetrating further and further into the area of the troops already going into action.
“What has happened?” he asked himself. “I killed a lover,  yes, I killed my wife’s lover. Yes, it happened. Why? How did I come to that?” “Because you married her,” an inner voice answered.
“Yes, I belong to the brotherhood of Freemasons,”3 said the traveler, peering more and more deeply into Pierre’s eyes. “And I give you a brotherly handshake on my own behalf and on theirs.”
Boris, in a dashing adjutant’s uniform, matured, fresh, and red-cheeked, walked freely into the drawing room and was duly taken to greet the aunt, and then reattached to the general circle.
This was spoken by the short Bonaparte, looking from below straight into Alexander’s eyes. Alexander listened attentively to what was said to him and, inclining his head, smiled pleasantly.
Since Boris left Moscow for the army in 1805, he had not seen the Rostovs. He had visited Moscow several times, had passed by not far from Otradnoe, but had never once been to the Rostovs’.
Nikolai sent his groom to call his sister and Petya to him and rode at a walk to the place where the kennelmen were gathering the hounds. Several hunters galloped to the scene of the fight.
“You are perfectly within your rights to show or not show respect for me,” said Balashov. “But allow me to observe that I have the honor to bear the rank of his majesty’s adjutant general…”
This view of things, widely spread in the higher spheres of the army, found support both in Petersburg and in the chancellor Rumyantsev, who, for other reasons of state, was also for peace.
“Andr&#233;,” said his wife, addressing her husband in the same coquettish tone in which she addressed others, “what a story the viscount told us about mademoiselle  George and Bonaparte!”
“I’m worn out with these visits,” she said. “Well, she’ll be the last I receive. She’s so prim. Ask her in,” she said to the footman in a sad voice, as if to say: “Well, so finish me off.”
Everyone looked at the door again: it creaked, and the second princess, having prepared the drink prescribed by Lorrain, carried it to the sick man. The German doctor went over to Lorrain.
“Once again, Colonel,” the general said, “I cannot in any case leave half my men in the woods. I beg  you, I beg  you,” he repeated, “to take up your position  and prepare for the attack.”
“So they were in a hurry to get started, but once they got started—here we stand witless in the middle of a field—it’s all these cursed Germans confusing things. What muddleheaded devils!”
Sonya was sitting at the clavichord and playing the prelude to the barcarolle  that Denisov especially liked. Natasha was preparing to sing. Denisov was looking at her with rapturous eyes.
It was also the second week that the horses had been eating straw from the roofs of houses; they were hideously skinny and still covered with their winter coat, which was matted in clumps.
In the midst of the conversation going on in the sitting room, Dimmler came in and went to the harp that stood in the corner. He took the cloth off it, and the harp gave out a false sound.
Sonya went out to the corridor, so as to go to the barn. Nikolai hastily went to the front porch, saying that he was hot. Indeed, it was stuffy in the house because of the crowd of people.
For about three minutes they were all silent. “She’s sure to!” Natasha whispered and did not finish…Suddenly Sonya moved away the mirror she was holding and covered her eyes with her hand.
“If he’s a noble man, then he should either declare his intentions or stop seeing you; and if you don’t want to do it, I’ll do it; I’ll write to him and tell papa ,” Sonya said resolutely.
“Look, Annette, ne me jouez pas un mauvais tour, ” she turned to the hostess. “Vouz m’avez &#233;crit que c’&#233;tait une toute petite soir&#233;e; voyez comme je suis attif&#233;e. ”‡29
“Gentlemen! Who wants to make a bet with me? I’ll do the same thing,” he suddenly shouted. “And there’s no need for a bet, that’s what. Tell them to bring a bottle. I’ll do it…tell them.”
“There’s no use denying it, ma ch&#232;re ! The dear countess was too clever with Vera,” said the count. “Well, so what! She still turned out nice,” he added, winking at Vera approvingly.
“Mon cher, si vous vous conduisez ici, comme &#224; P&#233;tersburg, vous finirez tr&#232;s mal; c’est tout ce je vous dis. *105 The count is very, very ill: you must not see him at all.”
“The thing is, my friend—what’s this stain you’ve got there?” she said, pointing to his waistcoat. “Must be the saut&#233;, ” she added, smiling. “The thing is, Count, that I need money.”
“I also wanted to ask you,” Prince Andrei continued, “if I’m killed, and if I should have a son, don’t let him leave you, as I told you yesterday; he should grow up here with you…please.”
“Some hot little fire for the infantry! Keep well, dear countrymen, thanks for the fire, we’ll pay it back with interest,” he said, carrying the burning brand somewhere into the darkness.
Dolokhov, who was standing in the middle of the crowd, tore his way to the edge of the dam, knocking two soldiers off their feet, and ran down onto the slippery ice that covered the pond.
“Enough, enough, what’s wrong?” frightened voices whispered. Dolokhov looked at Pierre with his light, merry, cruel eyes, and with the same smile, as if saying: “Ah, this is what I like.”
“Leave it,” said Dolokhov, though it seemed he was not even looking at Rostov, “you’ll win it back the sooner. I let the others win, but you I beat. Or are you afraid of me?” he repeated.
“Very well,” said Smolyaninov, and he went on at once: “Do you have any idea of the means by which our holy order can help you to achieve your goal?…” the rhetor asked calmly and quickly.
Nikolai also liked the uncle’s playing very much. The uncle played the song a second time. Anisya Fyodorovna’s smiling face again appeared in the doorway, and behind her some other faces.
“Yes, but it’s hard for us to imagine eternity,” said Dimmler, who had approached the young people with a mildly scornful smile, but was now speaking as softly and seriously as they were.
Balashov looked around him, awaiting the arrival of the officer from the village. The Russian Cossacks, and the bugler, and the French hussars silently glanced at each other now and then.
“What do I care about your allies?” said Napoleon. “I have the Poles for allies: there are eighty thousand of them, they fight like lions. And there will be two hundred thousand of them.”
Before Rostov had time to think and determine how far away those shots were, Count Ostermann-Tolstoy’s adjutant came galloping from Vitebsk with orders to proceed down the road at a trot.
“Bonaparte l’a dit,” *54 Prince Andrei said with a grin. (It was evident that he did not like the viscount and that, though he was not looking at him, his talk was directed against him.)
Her husband looked at her as if he was surprised to notice there was someone else in the room besides himself and Pierre. However, with cold politeness he inquiringly addressed his wife:
“Lise!” was all Prince Andrei said; but in this word there was an entreaty, and a threat, and above all the conviction that she herself would regret her words; but she hurriedly went on:
“What do you mean?” asked the countess, as if she did not know what the guest was talking about, though she had already heard the cause of Count Bezukhov’s distress a good fifteen times.
She took from her enormous reticule a pair of pear-shaped ruby earrings and, having given them to the festively radiant and red-cheeked Natasha, turned away at once and addressed Pierre.
“Te-n-n-n-HUT!” shouted the regimental commander in a soul-shattering voice, overjoyed for himself, strict in regard to the regiment, and welcoming in regard to his approaching superior.
With his naked eye, Prince Andrei saw below, to the right, a dense column of French coming up to meet the Apsherontsy, no further than five hundred paces from where Kutuzov was standing.
“Go onto the ice! Go onto the ice! Go! Turn off! Don’t you hear? Go!” cried countless voices after the cannonball hit the general, themselves not knowing what and why they were shouting.
“Ah, for pity’s sake, you keep saying stupid things, and you keep wanting to wait—see, we’ve waited,” said Prince Andrei in a spiteful whisper, clearly with the wish to sting his sister.
“A future life?” Prince Andrei repeated, but Pierre gave him no time to reply, and took this repetition for a denial, the more so as he knew Prince Andrei’s former atheistic convictions.
Pierre listened to her attentively and gravely. Prince Andrei left the room. And after him, Princess Marya left the people of God to finish their tea and took Pierre to the drawing room.
“I don’t argue, but it is impossible to deny that court privileges achieve the same goal,” said Prince Andrei. “Every courtier considers it his duty to uphold his position with dignity.”
“Well, if it’s long, we can take it up, we can take it up in a minute,” said the resolute Dunyasha, taking a needle out of the fichu on her breast and setting to work again on the floor.
They had not yet ridden a mile when the Rostov hunt was met by another five riders with dogs emerging from the mist. At their head rode a fresh, handsome old man with big gray mustaches.
Instead of the demand four months earlier that he withdraw from Pomerania, now they demanded only that he withdraw beyond the Niemen. Napoleon turned quickly and started pacing the room.
Anatole went up to the window with his victorious look. He wanted to break something. He pushed the lackeys away and pulled at the frame, but the frame did not yield. He smashed a pane.
“Wait,” cried Dolokhov, tapping the bottle against the window to attract attention. “Wait, Kuragin; listen. If anybody else does the same, I’ll pay him a hundred imperials. Understood?”
“They’ve been saying it for a long time,” said the count. “Again they’ll talk and talk and leave it at that. Ma ch&#232;re,  that’s friendship!” he repeated. “He’s joining the hussars.”
And he had not finished singing the last words before the young people in the ballroom began preparing to dance, and the musicians began stamping their feet and coughing in the gallery.
“Rotten luck,” he said, throwing down a purse with a few gold pieces. “Rostov, dear heart, count up what’s left and put it under the pillow,” he said and went out to the sergeant major.
“You tell the regimental commander about this muck in front of officers,” the staff captain went on. “Bogdanych” (the regimental commander was known as Bogdanych) “brings you up short.”
The princess went to the door, passed by it with a significant, indifferent look, and peeked into the drawing room. Pierre and H&#233;l&#232;ne were sitting and talking in the same way.
Tikhon knew the prince’s habit of sometimes expressing his thoughts aloud, and therefore with an unchanged face met the irately questioning gaze of the face that emerged from the shirt.
“I’ve received news. He’s not among the prisoners, and not among the dead. Kutuzov writes,” he cried shrilly, as if wishing to drive the princess away with this cry, “he’s been killed!”
When they all got up to leave, H&#233;l&#232;ne, who had spoken little all evening, again turned to Boris with the request and the gentle, meaningful order that he visit her on Tuesday.
One day she came to the countess, was about to say something to her, and suddenly began to cry. Her tears were the tears of an offended child who does not know why it is being punished.
“That’s metempsychosis,” said Sonya, who had always been a good student and remembered everything. “The Egyptians believed that our souls were in animals and will go back into animals.”
On an empty stomach, in the morning, all the old questions seemed as insoluble and frightening as ever, and Pierre would hastily seize a book and was glad when somebody came to see him.
“Worse and worse by the hour,” said Marya Dmitrievna. “A fine lad! What a scoundrel! And she’s waiting, she’s been waiting for two days. We must tell her; at least she’ll stop waiting.”
“Mais &#224; propos de votre famille, ” she said, “do you know that your daughter, since her coming out, fait les d&#233;lices de tout le monde? On la trouve belle, comme le jour.” †16
“I find it funny,” said Pierre, “that you, you yourself,  consider that you have no ability and that your life is a ruined life. You have everything, everything ahead of you. And you…”
The door to the inner rooms opened and one of the young princesses—the count’s nieces—came out, with a cold and sullen face and a long waist strikingly out of proportion with her legs.
“Thank God we’re in time,” she said to the clerical person. “We, his relations, were all so afraid. This young man is the count’s son,” she added in a lower voice. “A terrible moment!”
Denisov, chewing his mustache, was listening to the conversation with a gloomy air, apparently unwilling to enter into it. To the staff captain’s question he shook his head negatively.
Having looked under the bridge at the waters of the Enns, Nesvitsky suddenly heard a sound still new to him, the swift approach of…something big, and something splashed into the water.
But the guns remained loaded, the loopholes in the houses and fortifications looked out just as menacingly, and the unlimbered cannon remained turned against each other just as before.
“If I have time! I promised to be at the Arkharovs’ soir&#233;e,” said Nikolai. “And you?…” he turned to Dolokhov. And as soon as he asked it, he noticed that he should not have asked.
The regimental doctor came and said it was necessary to bleed him. A deep dish of dark blood came from Denisov’s shaggy arm, and only then was he able to tell what had happened to him.
In 1808 the emperor Alexander went to Erfurt for a new meeting with the emperor Napoleon, and there was much talk in Petersburg high society about the grandeur of this solemn meeting.1
When, a long time later, the uncle rode up to Nikolai and began speaking to him, Nikolai felt flattered that, after all that had happened, his uncle still condescended to speak to him.
Countess Bezukhov was entitled to her reputation as an enchanting woman. She was able to say what she did not think, and especially to flatter, with perfect simplicity and naturalness.
Pierre took the bundle of papers. Prince Andrei, as if trying to remember if he had something else to say, or waiting for Pierre to say something, stood looking at him with fixed eyes.
The mother smoothed the folds of her re-dyed silk dress, looked in a full-length Venetian mirror on the wall, and, in her down-at-heel shoes, went briskly up the carpet of the stairs.
“It comes over him, Your Excellency, some days,” said the captain. “He’s clever, and learned, and kind. And then he’s a beast. In Poland he all but killed a Jew, if you want to know…”
The generals came on, looking as if they could do without embarrassing honors. The face of the joker Zherkov suddenly showed a stupid smile of joy, which he seemed unable to suppress.
“I don’t know of who,  Colonel,” the cornet replied earnestly, “only the prince told me: ‘Go and tell the colonel that the hussars must turn back quickly and set fire to the bridge.’”
“For a dear friend, no detour’s too long,” Prince Vassily began, as usual, quickly, self-confidently, and familiarly. “Here is my second one, I recommend him to your loving kindness.”
“However, I think Mikhail Ilarionovich has come out,” said Prince Andrei. “I wish you luck and success, gentlemen,” he added and left, after shaking hands with Dolgorukov and Bilibin.
The bad presentiment that suddenly came over Rostov was confirmed more and more the further he rode into the space beyond the village of Pratz, occupied by crowds of different troops.
“Well, really! This, they say, is the commander of all the emperor Alexander’s guards,” said the first, pointing to a wounded Russian officer in the white uniform of the horse guards.
A week later Pierre gave his wife power of attorney for the management of all his estates in Great Russia,13 which formed the major part of his fortune, and left alone for Petersburg.
“Sophie,” he said, timidly at first, then more and more boldly, “if you want to refuse not only a brilliant but an advantageous match; but he’s a wonderful, noble man…he’s my friend…”
“That I can do, but I’m afraid to get confused; I ask you to put money on the cards,” replied Dolokhov. “And don’t you be shy, we’ll settle our accounts,” he added, turning to Rostov.
“Listen, Rostov,” said Dolokhov, smiling brightly and looking into Nikolai’s eyes, “you know the saying, ‘Lucky in love, unlucky at cards.’ Your cousin’s in love with you. I know it.”
“A dog on a fence, a real live dog on a fence,” Denisov said behind him, a cavalryman’s highest mockery of an infantryman on horseback, and riding up to Rostov, he burst out laughing.
“Well, go, go,” said Rostov, and, declining supper and remaining alone in the little room, he paced up and down for a long time and listened to the merry French talk in the next room.
“Why are you saying this?” Natasha interrupted him. “You know I’ve loved you from the very day you first came to Otradnoe,” she said, firmly convinced that she was speaking the truth.
“Hard to find…” repeated the count, obviously sorry that Semyon had stopped talking so soon. “Hard to find,” he said, pulling back the skirt of his jacket and taking out his snuffbox.
“And what the deuce makes us go to war with Bonaparte?” said Shinshin. “Il a d&#233;j&#224; rabattu le caquet &#224; l’Autriche. Je crains que cette fois ce ne soit notre tour.” *113
“Yes, I’ve long known, but I had forgotten, that apart from baseness, deceit, envy, intrigue, apart from ingratitude, the blackest ingratitude, I could expect nothing in this house…”
“That’s entirely as you will, ma’am,” said Prince Nikolai Andreevich, bowing and scraping before his daughter-in-law, “but she needn’t make herself ugly—she’s plain enough as it is.”
“In that case he’s going to his destruction by waiting for our attack,” Langeron said with a subtle, ironic smile, again glancing for support to Miloradovich, who was nearest to him.
The old prince came out for supper: this was obviously for Pierre’s sake. He was extremely affectionate with him on both days of his stay at Bald Hills and told him to come to visit.
After several minutes of expectation, the gentleman-in-waiting on duty that day came out to the large reception room and, with a courteous bow to Balashov, invited him to follow him.
“Calm yourself, Princess. It seems so to you, because, I assure you, I myself have experienced…why…because…No, excuse me, an outsider is in the way here…No, calm yourself…Good-bye…”
Pierre lived at Prince Vassily Kuragin’s and took part in the dissolute life of his son Anatole, the same one they planned to marry to Prince Andrei’s sister in order to reform him.
“Sell me the little lady,” another soldier said, with a stress on the last syllable, addressing the German, who, lowering his eyes, walked on with big strides, angry and frightened.
“It is a disgrace for a soldier to steal, a soldier should be honest, noble, and brave; and if one steals from his comrade, there is no honor in him, he is a scoundrel. More, more!”
“If I were in Nikolushka’s place, I’d have killed even more of those Frenchmen,” he said, “they’re so disgusting! I’d have cut down so many, there’d be a whole pile,” Petya went on.
Pierre was one of those people who, despite their ostensible weakness of character, as it is called, do not seek to confide their grief. He worked over his grief alone with himself.
The countess could not believe her ears. Denisov had proposed. To whom? To this tiny little girl, Natasha, who still recently was playing with dolls and was having lessons even now.
Pierre was again overcome by that anguish he feared so much. For three days after delivering his speech at the lodge, he lay at home on the sofa, receiving no one and going nowhere.
She understood that, in referring to the people he called nonentities, he had in mind not only Mlle Bourienne, who had ruined her happiness, but also the man who had ruined his own.
When Anna Mikhailovna and her son left for Count Kirill Vladimirovich Bezukhov’s, Countess Rostov sat for a long time alone, putting her handkerchief to her eyes. Finally she rang.
“Les Razoumovsky…&#199;a a &#233;t&#233; charmant…Vous &#234;tes bien bonne…La comtesse Apraksine…” *111 was heard on all sides. The countess got up and went to the reception room.
“Wait, there’s a letter for you,” the old man said suddenly, taking an envelope with a woman’s handwriting on it from a pouch attached to the table and dropping it in front of her.
He seized his hand in his bony little fist, shook it, looked straight into his son’s face with his quick eyes that seemed to see through a person, and again laughed his cold laugh.
Every muscle in Telyanin’s frightened, pale face began to quiver; his eyes shifted as before, but somewhere low down, not rising to Rostov’s face, and there was a sound of sobbing.
Like wind in the leaves, an excited whisper passed: “They’re coming! they’re coming!” Frightened voices were heard, and the bustle of final preparations rippled through the troops.
Boris smiled as if he understood what Prince Andrei was hinting at as common knowledge. But it was the first time he had heard the name of Weyrother and even the word disposition.
“Imagine, we got into the front line! Our regiment went into an attack!” said Boris, smiling that happy smile which occurs in young men who have been under fire for the first time.
With trembling hands Natasha held this passionate love letter, composed for Anatole by Dolokhov, and, reading it, she found in it echoes of everything she thought she felt herself.
“C’est que je d&#233;teste les histoires des revenants,” ‡41 said Prince Ippolit in such a tone that it was clear he had said these words and only then understood what they meant.
“Delighted, delighted,” he said and, looking her intently in the eye once again, quickly stepped away and sat down in his place. “Sit down, sit down! Mikhail Ivanovich, sit down.”
He leaned his elbow on the table, the quill in his hand, and, obviously glad of the chance to quickly speak out everything he wanted to write, began reciting his letter to Rostov.
“And then some!” shouted Denisov. “Good work, lads! And it was a rotten job! Attacking’s a lovely thing, cut ’em to pieces, but here, devil knows, it’s more like target practice.”
“They sent you a decent sum of money, though,” said Berg, looking at the heavy purse pressing down on the sofa. “And we just get by on our pay, Count. I’ll tell you about myself…”
After five in the evening, Kutuzov came to the emperors’ headquarters and, having spent a short time with the sovereign, went to see the grand marshal of the court, Count Tolstoy.
“Well, we’re such friends, such friends! This is just silliness—the ruler; but we’re friends forever. If she loves someone, it’s forever. I don’t understand it. I forget at once.”
The third time the rhetor came back sooner and asked Pierre whether he was still firm in his intention and was determined to submit himself to everything that was demanded of him.
It was clear that Prince Andrei’s mocking attitude towards the wanderers and Princess Marya’s useless intercession for them were habitual, well-established relations between them.
“Mais, ma bonne amie,”  said Prince Andrei, “vous devriez au contraire m’&#234;tre reconnaissante de ce que j’explique &#224; Pierre votre intimit&#233; avec ce jeune homme.” ‡323
From behind the hut came the rolling shout of Denisov, obviously in a fit of temper. Rostov moved to the window to see whom he was dealing with, and saw Sergeant Major Topcheenko.
“My father, whom I told of my plans, made it an absolute condition for his consent that the marriage not take place for a year. And I wanted to tell you that,” said Prince Andrei.
“How can one be well…when one suffers morally? Is it possible to remain at ease in our time, if one has any feeling?” said Anna Pavlovna. “You’ll stay the whole evening, I hope?”
“La balance y est …A German can make cheese from chalk, comme dit le proverbe,” †110 said Shinshin, shifting the amber to the other side of his mouth, and he winked at the count.
“And do you think it’s any easier for me?” he said. “Je suis &#233;reint&#233; comme un cheval de poste; †120 but all the same I must talk with you, Catiche, and very seriously.”
“The third, I said, the third,” the prince shouted curtly, pushing the letter away, and, leaning his elbow on the table, he drew the notebook with geometric drawings towards him.
The third time, as Prince Andrei was finishing his description, the old man sang in an old man’s off-key voice: “Malbroug s’en va-t-en guerre. Dieu sait quand reviendra.” *164 47
Rostov laughed so loudly and merrily that Denisov felt envious in his room, and Natasha, unable to help herself, laughed with him. “No, but it’s nice, isn’t it?” she kept saying.
“Je vous demande pardon, une tabati&#232;re avec le portrait de l’Empereur est une r&#233;compense, mais point une distinction,”  said the diplomat, “un cadeau plut&#244;t.” *307
At ten o’clock in the evening they were to pick up the lady-in-waiting near the Tavrichesky Garden;16 yet it was five minutes to ten, and the young ladies were still not dressed.
After dinner Speransky’s daughter and her governess got up. Speransky stroked his daughter with his white hand and kissed her. And this gesture seemed unnatural to Prince Andrei.
“And I remember being told that you were born under a cabbage,” Natasha said, “and I remember not daring to disbelieve it then, but I knew it wasn’t true, and I felt so awkward.”
Natasha, Sonya, Mme Schoss, and two maids got into Nikolai’s sleigh. Dimmler, his wife, and Petya got into the old count’s sleigh; the dressed-up servants got into the other two.
Shinshin began telling the count in a low voice the story of some intrigue of Kuragin’s in Moscow, which Natasha listened in on precisely because he had said “charmante”  of her.
“What then? Eh?” Anatole repeated, genuinely puzzled by the thought of the future. “What then? I don’t know what then…But why talk nonsense!” He looked at his watch. “It’s time!”
“Mais, mon cher monsieur Pierre,”  said Anna Pavlovna, “how do you explain a great man who could execute a duke, or, finally, any simple man, without a trial and without guilt?”
The little princess had filled out during this time, but her eyes and her short lip with its little mustache and smile rose as gaily and sweetly as ever when she began to speak.
Princess Marya looked at her brother in surprise. She did not understand what made him smile. Everything her father did evoked an awe in her which was not subject to discussion.
The company commander, not taking his eyes off his superior officer, pressed his two fingers more and more firmly to his visor, as if he now saw salvation only in this pressing.
“That’s all well and good, nobody thinks you’re a coward, but that’s not the point. Ask Denisov what it looks like if a junker demands satisfaction from a regimental commander.”
“They don’t even give us time to drink!” replied Vaska Denisov. “They drag the regiment here and there all day. If it’s fighting, it’s fighting. Or else devil knows what it is!”
“What is this, Colonel?” he cried while still riding. “I told you to set fire to the bridge, and somebody got it wrong; everybody’s going crazy there, they can’t figure it out.”
“It’s begun! Here it is!” thought Prince Andrei, feeling the blood beginning to rush more quickly to his heart. “But where, then? How will my Toulon declare itself?” he thought.
Prince Vassily, as if not listening to the ladies, went to the far corner and sat on the sofa. He closed his eyes and seemed to be dozing. His head began to nod, and he woke up.
“No need, no need…” the prince said quickly and, putting his feet into his slippers and his arms through the sleeves of his dressing gown, he went to the sofa on which he slept.
“But in what position are we going to attack him? I was at the outposts today, and it’s impossible to tell precisely where he’s camped with his main forces,” said Prince Andrei.
“Me tried for robbery—ach! Give me more water—let them try me, but I’ll beat the scoundrels, I’ll always beat them, and I’ll tell the sovereign. Give me ice,” he kept murmuring.
“Yes, yes, all right,” the count said quickly, “only, excuse me, my friend, I’ll give you twenty thousand, and a promissory note for eighty thousand besides. So there, kiss me.”
“A blackamoor,” Nikolai finished with a joyful smile, “as if I don’t remember! And I don’t even know now if it was a blackamoor, or we dreamed it up, or somebody told it to us.”
After indulgent surprise, nonrecognition, and praise from the noncostumed side, the young people decided their disguises were so good that they had to be shown to somebody else.
Judging by the calmly moderate and friendly tone with which the French emperor spoke, Balashov was firmly convinced that he wanted peace and intended to enter into negotiations.
He shrugged his shoulders and spread his arms. Pierre was about to say something: the conversation interested him, but Anna Pavlovna, who was keeping watch on him, interrupted.
“Let me collect my wits, papa,” he said, with a smile which showed that his father’s weaknesses did not prevent him from loving and respecting him. “I haven’t even settled in.”
“Here it is!” thought Prince Andrei, seizing the staff of the standard and hearing with delight the whistle of bullets, evidently aimed precisely at him. Several soldiers fell.
Towards ten o’clock the manservants rushed out to the porch, hearing the bells of the old prince’s carriage as it drove up. Prince Andrei and Pierre also went out to the porch.
“And a good thing, too, little countess,” said the uncle. “As long as you don’t fall off your horse,” he added, “because—right you are!—there’s not much there to hold on with.”
“Why is it hard to imagine eternity?” asked Natasha. “There will be today, there will be tomorrow, there will be always, and there was yesterday, and there was the day before…”
“I take them back, I take them back,” said Pierre, “and I beg you to forgive me.” Pierre glanced involuntarily at the torn-off button. “And money, if you need it for the road.”
“That’s doubtful,” said Prince Andrei. “Monsieur le vicomte  quite rightly supposes that things have already gone too far. I think it would be hard to return to the old ways.”
“Not at all out of friendship,” replied Nikolai, blushing and protesting, as if it was a shameful calumny. “It’s not friendship, I simply feel a calling for military service.”
Pierre understood none of it; he had a still stronger impression that this was how it had to be, and he obediently followed Anna Mikhailovna, who was already opening the door.
“Do you hear how his honor is walking?” Tikhon said, drawing the architect’s attention to the sound of the prince’s footsteps. “Stepping full on his heels—we know about that…”
After dinner he went to see his daughter-in-law. The little princess was sitting at a small table chatting with the maid Masha. She turned pale when she saw her father-in-law.
“And you know, my friend, it seems to me that Bonaparte has decidedly lost his Latin.4 You know, a letter to the emperor came from him today.” Dolgorukov smiled significantly.
Everything within him and around him seemed confused, senseless, and loathsome. But in this very loathing for everything around him, Pierre took a sort of irritating pleasure.
Pierre changed his place several times during the game, sitting now with his back to Natasha, now facing her, and in the course of all six rubbers observed her and his friend.
“The island of Madagascar,” she said. “Ma-da-gas-car,” she repeated each syllable distinctly and, not answering Mme Schoss’s question about what she was saying, left the room.
“If I’d seen her before as she is now,” thought Nikolai, “I’d have asked her long ago what I should do, and I’d have done whatever she told me, and everything would be right.”
“Nowadays, in order to please Moscow girls, il faut &#234;tre m&#233;lancolique. Et il est tr&#232;s m&#233;lancolique aupr&#232;s de mademoiselle Karagine, ”†364 said Pierre.
The next day Napoleon, going ahead of his army, drove to the Niemen in his carriage and, to look for a crossing place, changed into a Polish uniform and drove out on the bank.
“However, a great number of monasteries and churches is always a sign of a nation’s backwardness,” said Napoleon, turning to Caulaincourt for an appreciation of this judgment.
“Well, off you go, off you go, you and that ugly thing!” said the mother, pushing her daughter away with feigned gruffness. “This is my younger one,” she turned to her guest.
“And what’s going on with us, brother! Terrible! I confess, brother, we laughed at Mack, and yet it’s going much worse for us,” said Nesvitsky. “But sit down, eat something.”
“That officer bloodied it, Your Honor,” the artillerist replied, wiping the blood with the sleeve of his greatcoat and as if apologizing for the unclean state the gun was in.
“How is it that a gun was abandoned?” asked Bagration, frowning not so much at the captain as at those who laughed, among whom Zherkov’s voice sounded louder than the others.
“There’s something here,” thought Nikolai and, still more convinced of his conjecture by Dolokhov’s departure right after dinner, he called Natasha out and asked what it was.
“No, I considered it incorrect and did not follow it,” Pierre said, so softly that the rhetor did not hear and asked him what he had said. “I was an atheist,” Pierre replied.
Prince Andrei said this with such enthusiasm that it involuntarily occurred to Pierre that these thoughts had been suggested to Prince Andrei by his father. He made no reply.
“If she goes to her cousin first and then to another lady, she’ll be my wife,” Prince Andrei quite unexpectedly said to himself, looking at her. She went to her cousin first.
The countess, trying to conceal this action from herself and the doctor, would put a gold piece in his hand and go back to her daughter each time with her heart more at ease.
The countess was upset by her friend’s woes and humiliating poverty, and was therefore out of sorts, which always expressed itself in her calling the maid “dear” and “miss.”
“Well, aren’t you a fool!” shouted the prince, shoving the notebook away, but he got up at once, paced about, touched the princess’s hair with his hands, and sat down again.
“He’s always been tough, but now I think he’s becoming difficult,” said Prince Andrei, probably speaking so lightly of their father on purpose, to puzzle or test his sister.
The happy state of mind of the officers after the review passed itself on to the soldiers. The company walked along merrily. On all sides soldiers’ voices exchanged remarks.
“Maybe I forgot? No, I thought then that it was as if you were hiding a treasure under your head,” said Rostov. “I put the purse there. Where is it?” he turned to Lavrushka.
“That’s better, Count!” the staff captain repeated, as if beginning to call him by his title on account of his acknowledgment. “Go and apologize, Your Excellency, yes, sir.”
“Nobody needs me!” thought Rostov. “There’s nobody to help me or pity me. And once I was at home, strong, cheerful, loved.” He sighed and involuntarily groaned as he sighed.
“Ouch, it hurts, eh?” the little soldier asked, waving his shirt over the fire and, not waiting for a reply, he grunted and said: “Quite a few folk got damaged today—awful!”
“Have these gentlemen looked after and taken to my bivouac; have my doctor Larrey examine their wounds. Good-bye, Prince Repnin.” And, touching up his horse, he galloped on.
“For them everything’s the same. They don’t know anything! What am I to do with myself?” thought Nikolai, and he went back to the reception room, where the clavichord stood.
“Yes, wait,” said Denisov, glancing at the officers, and, taking his papers from under the pillow, he went to the window, where there was an inkstand, and sat down to write.
“I have come by the will of the sovereign emperor to learn from Your Excellency what chances you intend to give to the memorandum submitted,” Prince Andrei said courteously.
In the second category Pierre included himself and similar brothers, seeking, vacillating, who had not yet found in Masonry a straight and clear path, but hoped to find one.
“I just called on the countess, your spouse, and was so unlucky as to have my request go unfulfilled; I hope that with you, Count, I shall have more luck,” he said, smiling.
Nikolai, who wanted to give everyone a ride over the excellent road in his troika, suggested that they take a dozen or so of the dressed-up servants and go to their uncle’s.
“Well, Fedya, farewell, thanks for everything, farewell,” said Anatole. “Well, comrades, friends…” he pondered “…of my…youth, farewell,” he turned to Makarin and the others.
Boris felt that Pierre did not recognize him, but he did not consider it necessary to give his name, and, not feeling the least embarrassed, looked him straight in the eye.
“Your son,” he wrote, “promises to become an outstanding officer, by his knowledge, firmness, and industry. I consider myself fortunate to have such a subordinate at hand.”
“General in Chief Kutuzov?” the just-arrived general spoke quickly, with a strong German accent, glancing to both sides and going to the door of the office without pausing.
And he smiled approvingly, obviously glad for the junker. Rostov felt himself perfectly happy. Just then the commander appeared on the bridge. Denisov galloped towards him.
“But why didn’t you get there at seven in the morning? You had to get there at seven in the morning,” Bilibin said, smiling, “you had to get there at seven in the morning.”
They all laughed. Ippolit laughed more than anyone else. He obviously suffered, choked, but was unable to hold back the wild laughter that distended his ever immobile face.
“Hurry up, hurry up,” thought Rostov, sensing that the time had come at last to experience the delight of an attack, of which he had heard so much from his hussar comrades.
An Austrian officer in a white uniform with green plumes on his hat rode up to Kutuzov and asked on behalf of the emperor whether the fourth column had started into action.
“Look out!” he cried in a voice which made it clear that this word had been asking long and painfully to be let out. And, releasing his dogs, he galloped towards the count.
“I knew you’d be here,” Pierre replied. “I’ll come to you for supper,” he added softly, so as not to interfere with the viscount, who was going on with his story. “May I?”
As happens in early youth, and especially when one is alone, he felt a gratuitous tenderness for this young man and promised himself to be sure to become friends with him.
“There’s one thing for which I never cease praying to God, mon cousin, ” she replied, “that He have mercy on him and grant that his beautiful soul peacefully depart this…”
“What, he’s been reduced to a field marshal, is it, or to a common soldier? If it’s a common soldier, then he should be dressed in the proper uniform like everybody else.”
“Mama, the toque more to one side,” said Natasha. “I’ll re-pin it,” and she rushed forward, and the sewing girls, who had no time to follow her, tore off a piece of gauze.
“I’m coming from the staff, Count. Have you heard about Raevsky’s feat?” And the officer recounted the details of the battle of Saltanovo, which he had heard at the staff.
Her face suddenly flushed, expressing a desperate and merry resolve. She stood up, her eyes inviting Pierre, who sat across from her, to listen, and addressed her mother.
“To the right from the corridor; there, Euer Hochgeboren, *186 you will find the imperial adjutant on duty,” said the official. “He will take you to the minister of war.”
Prince Andrei looked once more at the little figure of the artillerist. There was something special in it, totally unmilitary, slightly comical, but extremely attractive.
But before he finished saying it, Prince Andrei, feeling sobs of shame and anger rising in his throat, was already jumping off his horse and running towards the standard.
“Denisov, we’re here!—he’s asleep,” he said, leaning his whole body forward, as if hoping by this posture to speed up the movement of the sleigh. Denisov did not respond.
“But if for some reason you find conversation with me unpleasant,” said the old man, “say so, my dear sir.” And he suddenly smiled an unexpectedly gentle, fatherly smile.
“Le Roi de Prusse…”  and again, as soon as they turned to him, he apologized and fell silent. Anna Pavlovna winced. Mortemart, Ippolit’s friend, addressed him resolutely:
“Well, what now!” he said crossly and, having listened to the verbal orders from his father and taking the envelopes and his father’s letter, he went back to the nursery.
“No, I’m going, I’m certainly going,” Natasha said resolutely. “Danilo, order horses saddled for us, and have Mikhailo ride out with my pack,” she turned to the huntsman.
“Just so, sir. He knows where to stand. He’s got such fine knowledge of horsemanship, me and Danilo just marvel sometimes,” said Semyon, knowing how to please his master.
“Ah, here she is,” said Ilya Andreich, seeing Natasha come in. “Well, sit here with me.” But Natasha stopped by her mother, looking around, as if searching for something.
“That one, I think, was Natasha,” thought Nikolai, “and that one Mme Schoss, or maybe not; and this Circassian with the mustache—I don’t know who she is, but I love her.”
“Not yet, ” Napoleon put in, and, as if afraid of giving way to his emotion, he frowned and inclined his head slightly, thereby letting Balashov feel that he could go on.
“And the f&#234;te at the British ambassador’s? Today is Wednesday. I must put in an appearance,” said the prince. “My daughter will come to fetch me and take me there.”
Pierre gazed wonderingly and na&#239;vely through his spectacles now at him, now at the princess, and stirred as if he also wanted to get up, but changed his mind again.
“No, Pyotr Nikolaevich, I merely wish to prove, sir, that the cavalry is much less profitable than the infantry. Now look, Pyotr Nikolaevich, just consider my position.”
“Well, old boy, infantry or cavalry, you’ll make it anywhere; that I prophesy to you,” said Shinshin, patting him on the shoulder and lowering his feet from the ottoman.
He turned around. Nesvitsky’s handsome face was looking out of a small window. Nesvitsky, chewing something with his juicy mouth and waving his arms, was calling to him.
“It would have been hard to get through, Your Excellency,” the steward added. “So we’ve heard, Your Excellency, that a minister is going to be visiting Your Excellency?”
“What is this? What is this? Who’s being shot at? Who’s shooting?” asked Rostov, drawing even with Russian and Austrian soldiers running in mixed crowds across his path.
“Here’s the intersection where the cabby Zakhar stands; here’s Zakhar, and still the same horse! Here’s the grocery where we used to buy gingerbread. Soon now? Come on!”
“Of course, good sir, I was deemed worthy. There was radiance on her face, like a heavenly light, and it dripped from the holy Mother’s cheek, just dripped and dripped…”
“Back!” Semyon shouted at a dog that had stepped out of the bushes. The count gave a start and dropped the snuffbox. Nastasya Ivanovna dismounted and went to pick it up.
Natasha threw off the kerchief she had wrapped around her, ran and placed herself in front of her uncle and, arms akimbo, made a movement with her shoulders and stopped.
Dolokhov put the money away and, shouting for his man, so as to order food and drinks served before the road, went to the room where Makarin and Khvostikov were sitting.
“Well, goodbye, Matryosha,” said Anatole, kissing her. “Eh, my carousing’s finished here! Greetings to Styoshka.16 Well, goodbye! Goodbye, Matryosha; wish me happiness.”
“Ah, voyons. Contez-nous cela, vicomte,” *34 said Anna Pavlovna, joyfully sensing that something &#224; la Louis XV echoed in this phrase, “contez-nous cela, vicomte.”
“No, you won’t get anywhere with him that way,” said Anatole. “Wait, I’ll trick him. Listen, I’ll make a bet with you, but tomorrow, and now let’s all go to the * * *.”
“Why should you go? I know, you think it’s your duty to gallop off to the army, now that the army is in danger. I understand that, mon cher, c’est de l’h&#233;roisme .”
“Hurrah!” cried Prince Andrei, barely able to hold up the heavy standard, and he ran forward with unquestioning assurance that the entire battalion would run after him.
“Yes, perhaps…” Dolokhov answered coldly and angrily, glancing at Sonya, and, frowning, he glanced at Nikolai exactly as he had looked at Pierre during the club dinner.
Boris promised to fulfill her wish and was about to get into conversation with her, when Anna Pavlovna called him away, on the pretext that her aunt wanted to hear him.
“Only, please, when I’m entertaining the guests,” said Vera, “don’t interrupt me, because I know how to entertain each of them and what to say in all kinds of company.”
Princess Marya told Pierre that she planned, as soon as the Rostovs arrived, to become close with her future sister-in-law and to try to get the old prince used to her.
The whole aim of his speech now was obviously to exalt himself and insult Alexander, that is, to do the thing he had least wanted to do at the beginning of the meeting.
“Ah, my God! My God!” he said. “And to think of who—of what nonentities—can be the cause of people’s unhappiness!” he said with a malice that frightened Princess Marya.
Among all the ideas and voices in this immense, restless, brilliant, and proud world, Prince Andrei saw the following more sharply distinguished tendencies and parties.
“Charmant,”  whispered the little princess, sticking the needle into her work as if to signify that the interest and charm of the story kept her from going on working.
The princess said nothing, and her short lip with its little mustache suddenly trembled. Prince Andrei, getting up and shrugging his shoulders, began to pace the room.
And Boris, obviously relieving himself of a painful duty, getting out of an awkward situation himself, and putting another man in one, again became perfectly pleasant.
“Tonight, no later,” he said softly, with a decent smile of self-satisfaction at being able to clearly understand and explain the patient’s condition, and walked away.
They stood silently facing each other. The old man’s quick eyes were aimed straight into his son’s eyes. Something twitched in the lower part of the old prince’s face.
“The master’s not at home, he’s gone to the staff,” Telyanin’s orderly told him. “Has something happened?” the orderly added, surprised to see the junker’s upset face.
“If we get to Vienna, I’ll leave it all there, but there’s nothing to do with it in these trashy little towns,” he said. “Well, young man, give it to me, I’m leaving.”
Prince Andrei, having washed and dressed, came out to the diplomat’s luxurious study and sat down to the prepared dinner. Bilibin settled comfortably by the fireplace.
“But what’s worst of all, gentlemen—I’m betraying Kuragin to you—is that the man is in misfortune, and this Don Juan, this terrible fellow, is taking advantage of it!”
“Go on, more, more!” the company commander egged him on, leaning forward and trying not to miss a single incomprehensible word. “Thicker and faster! What’s he saying?”
“Les munitions des pi&#232;ces de positions sont &#233;puis&#233;es, sire!” †272 an adjutant said just then, having come from the batteries that were firing on Augesd.
Bolkonsky recognized Prince Repnin, whom he used to meet in Petersburg society. Next to him stood another wounded officer of the horse guards, a nineteen-year-old boy.
“Makar Alexeich has the lists,” said the assistant. “But if you’d be pleased to go to the officers’ ward, you can see for yourself there,” he added, turning to Rostov.
The sovereigns got on their horses and left. The Preobrazhensky battalion, breaking ranks, mingled with the French guards and sat down at the tables prepared for them.
When Pierre came up to them, he noticed that Vera was conversing with self-satisfied enthusiasm, while Prince Andrei seemed embarrassed (which seldom happened to him).
“What else did he say to you? There were some verses? Read them…” her mother said pensively, asking about the verses that Prince Andrei had written in Natasha’s album.
They waited dinner a long time that day for Natasha. She sat in her room and wept like a child, blowing her nose and sobbing. Sonya stood over her and kissed her hair.
“Ah, let me be, why did you interfere with everything! Why? why? who asked you to?” cried Natasha, raising herself on the sofa and looking angrily at Marya Dmitrievna.
“Yes, it’s all very painful,” Pierre picked up, “very painful.” Pierre kept fearing that this officer would accidentally fall into a conversation awkward for himself.
“D&#233;mosth&#232;ne, je te reconnais au caillou que tu as cach&#233; dans ta bouche d’or!” ‡20613 said Bilibin, whose shock of hair moved on his head with pleasure.
“Try to praise the order for the delivery of provisions and the itineraries as much as possible to the emperor,” said Bilibin, seeing Bolkonsky off to the front hall.
“C’est trahison peut-&#234;tre,” *212 said Prince Andrei, vividly imagining gray greatcoats, wounds, gunsmoke, the sounds of shooting, and the glory that awaited him…
“Well, that’s splendid,” he said, “we’ll talk later. Ah, I’m so glad to see you!” he added. “Well, and what about you, you haven’t betrayed Boris?” asked her brother.
“Mon cher,”  said Kochubey, “even in this matter you cannot avoid Mikhail Mikhailovich. C’est le grand faiseur. *337 I’ll tell him. He promised to come this evening…”
Prince Andrei, with a radiant, rapturous face, renewed towards life, stopped before Pierre and, not noticing his sad face, smiled at him with the egoism of happiness.
“It is long since we’ve had the pleasure…” the countess began, but Prince Andrei interrupted her, answering her question and obviously hurrying to say what he had to.
While performing the figures of the mazurka, Boris was ceaselessly tormented by the thought of the news brought by Balashov and how to find it out before anyone else.
Davout was the emperor Napoleon’s Arakcheev—a noncowardly Arakcheev, but equally efficient, cruel, and incapable of expressing his devotion otherwise than by cruelty.
The letter Balashov brought back was Napoleon’s last letter to Alexander. All the details of the conversation were conveyed to the Russian emperor, and the war began.
“But do you take it without sugar?” she asked, with the same smile as if everything she said and everything the others said was very funny and had some other meaning.
“Tr&#232;s beau,”  the doctor said in reply to a question about the weather, “tr&#232;s beau, princesse, et puis, &#224; Moscou on se croit &#224; la campagne.” *116
“I have the honor to congratulate you: General Mack has arrived in good health, except for a slight wound here,” he added with a beaming smile, pointing to his head.
“Colonel,” he said with his gloomy earnestness, addressing Rostov’s enemy and looking around at his comrades, “there is an order to stop and set fire to the bridge.”
Rostov, without answering, shook the soldier’s Cross of St. George that hung on the cords of his uniform and, pointing to his arm in a sling, looked smiling at Berg.
“About your affair,” Prince Andrei turned to Boris again, “we’ll speak later,” and he glanced at Rostov. “Come to me after the review, we’ll do all that’s possible.”
Rostov also shouted with all his might, leaning towards his saddle, wishing to hurt himself with this cry, only so as to express fully his rapture for the sovereign.
“No, listen,” she said, “you’re quite a man now. I’m terribly glad you’re my brother.” She touched his mustache. “I’d like to know how you men are. Are you like us?”
“I’ve come to sit with you, Mashenka,” said the nanny, “and here I’ve brought the prince’s wedding candles15 to light before the saint, my angel,” she said, sighing.
“If you are firm, then I must commence your induction,” said the rhetor, coming closer to Pierre. “As a sign of generosity, I ask you to give me all your valuables.”
Prince Andrei sighed, and with a luminous, childlike, tender gaze looked into the flushed, rapturous face of Pierre, who still felt timid before his superior friend.
“Eh, you’d better not, my lad,” said the doctor, “or you may wind up staying yourself!” But Rostov took leave of the doctor and asked the assistant to accompany him.
“I think, Princess, that now is not the right time to speak of it,” Natasha said with outward dignity and coldness, and with tears that she could feel in her throat.
During the night of the twelfth of June, on the eve of action, there was violent rain and a thunderstorm. The summer of 1812 was generally remarkable for its storms.
“Hurrah! Let’s go quick, Rostov. I found it! A tavern, about two hundred paces from here, our boys are already there. We can dry out, and Marya Genrikhovna’s there.”
“I thought something had happened,” said the princess, and with her unchanging, stern and stony expression, she sat down opposite the prince and prepared to listen.
“Yes, I was stupid, I still believed in people, and loved them, and sacrificed myself. But only those who are mean and vile succeed. I know whose intrigue this is.”
“I’m not saying that this is a plan I approve of,” the son said, “I’ve only told you what’s in it. Napoleon has already put together a plan no worse than this one.”
Denisov, wincing as if he was smiling and baring his short, strong teeth, began tousling his forest-thick, tangled, bushy black hair with both short-fingered hands.
“On bote  sides, Captain,” he heard the voice of the regimental commander, who, having ridden ahead, stood mounted near the bridge with a triumphant and merry face.
“Ach, Erlaucht!”  said Franz, loading the trunk into the britzka with difficulty. “Wir ziehen noch weiter. Der B&#246;sewicht ist schon wieder hinter uns her!” *208
“No apologies, decidedly nothing,” Dolokhov replied to Denisov, who for his part also made an attempt at reconciliation, and he also walked to the designated place.
“And I’ve been looking for you,” said Natasha, running out to him. “I kept saying it, and you refused to believe me,” she said triumphantly. “He proposed to Sonya.”
When Boris and Anna Pavlovna returned to the general circle, the conversation there had been taken over by Prince Ippolit. Leaning forward in his armchair, he said:
“In my view,” he said, turning to Rostov, “he ought simply to beg the sovereign for mercy. They say there will be lots of rewards now, and surely he’d be forgiven…”
Anatole quite soon abandoned his wife and, for the money he promised to send to his father-in-law, reserved for himself the right to pass himself off as a bachelor.
After tea, Sonya saw a timorous maid waiting for her by Natasha’s door. She let her in and, eavesdropping at the door, learned that a letter had been brought again.
“No, gentlemen, you’ve had enough sleep, and I haven’t slept for two nights,” the doctor said and gloomily sat down beside to his wife, waiting for the game to end.
“Soyez homme, mon ami, c’est moi qui veillerai &#224; vos int&#233;r&#234;ts,” †129 she said in response to his look and went still more quickly down the corridor.
The third company was the last, and Kutuzov fell to thinking, evidently recalling something. Prince Andrei stepped from among the suite and said quietly in French:
“De l’histoire ancienne,”  said a third, realizing that the talk was about former wars. “L’Empereur va lui faire voir &#224; votre Souvara, comme les autres…” †220
And, glancing around the room, he turned to Rostov, whose state of uncontrollable childish embarrassment, turning into spite, he did not deign to notice, and said:
The cannonballs went on regularly whistling and smacking into the ice, into the water, and most often into the crowd that covered the dam, the ponds, and the bank.
“Ahh!” Rostov nearly cried, seizing his hair with both hands. The seven he needed was lying on top, the first card in the deck. He had lost more than he could pay.
“Sire, je vous demande la permission de donner la L&#233;gion d’honneur au plus brave de vos soldats,” *333 said a sharp, precise voice, articulating every letter.
During that time a letter came from his wife, who begged him to agree to see her, wrote of her sadness without him and of her wish to devote her whole life to him.
“Yesterday my brother dined with me—we died of laughter—he eats nothing and sighs after you, my lovely. Il est fou, mais fou amoureux de vous, ma ch&#232;re. ”*381
“Don’t say such things to me, I am betrothed and love another man,” she said quickly…She glanced at him. Anatole was not embarrassed or upset by what she told him.
Boris quietly went to the door and followed Natasha out; the fat boy angrily ran after them, as if vexed at the disturbance that had interfered with his pursuits.
“Ah, mon ami!”  she said, with the same gesture as in the morning, when she touched her son’s arm, “croyez que je souffre autant que vous, mais soyez homme.” *127
“All that there was before seems good,” he said, “but wasn’t it that same Suvorov who fell into the trap set for him by Moreau and was unable to get out of it?”48
“He just gave it to him, the dear fellow, right in the teeth with his musket butt…” one soldier in a high-tucked greatcoat said joyfully, swinging his arm widely.
On all sides one saw wet, sad-faced officers, who seemed to be looking for something, and soldiers, who were dragging doors, benches, and fences from the village.
“Give him a seat, give him a seat,” said Tushin. “You, uncle, spread a greatcoat under him,” he turned to his favorite soldier. “And where’s the wounded officer?”
Prince Andrei looked at Tushin and, saying nothing, walked away. Prince Andrei felt sad and downhearted. All this was so strange, so unlike what he had hoped for.
“Do it for her, mon cher;  after all, she suffered much from the deceased,” Prince Vassily said to him, handing him some paper to sign for the princess’s benefit.
“Yes,” said Natasha. “You see, Nikolenka, don’t be angry, but I know you won’t marry her. I know, God knows how, but I know for certain that you won’t marry her.”
“What do you want here, Your Honor?” asked the doctor. “What do you want here? The bullet missed you, so you want to catch typhus? This is a pest-house, old boy.”
“Your father, a man of the old days, obviously stands higher than our contemporaries who condemn this measure so much, though it merely restores natural justice.”
“I want him…  now, this minute, I want him, ” Natasha said, her eyes glistening and not smiling. The countess raised her head and looked intently at her daughter.
The butler Foka was the most ill-tempered man in the whole house. Natasha liked to test her power over him. He did not believe her and went to ask if it was true.
“Do help me out, dear Fyodor Ivanych, or you, Your Excellency,” he would say. “I’ve got no horses left, and it’s time to go to the fair. Advance me what you can.”
“Come over here, ch&#232;re  H&#233;l&#232;ne,” Anna Pavlovna said to the beautiful princess, who was sitting some way off, forming the center of another circle.
And with the air of a practical Petersburg lady who knows how to make use of her time, Anna Mikhailovna sent for her son and went out with him to the front hall.
“Can it be?” exclaimed Anna Mikhailovna. “Ah, it’s terrible! I’m afraid to think…This is my son,” she added, pointing to Boris. “He wanted to thank you himself.”
Pierre understood that Boris wanted to change the subject, and, agreeing with him, began to explain the advantages and disadvantages of the Boulogne undertaking.
“It is a great sacrament, my dear,” the clerical person replied, passing his hand over his bald head, which had several strands of half-gray hair combed over it.
“Off with you to your Buonaparte, then. Mademoiselle Bourienne, voil&#224; encore un admirateur de votre goujat d’empereur! ”*167 he shouted in excellent French.
“I am not joking with you, kindly keep silent!” shouted Bolkonsky, and, taking Nesvitsky by the arm, he walked away from Zherkov, who was at a loss how to reply.
“I vill set feuer  to the bridge,” he said in a solemn tone, as if to show that, despite all the unpleasantness done to him, he would still do what he had to do.
“Non, non, avouez que c’est charmant,”  he was saying, “cette histoire du pont de Tabor”  (a bridge in Vienna). “Ils l’ont pass&#233; sans coup f&#233;rir.” *209
It was clear that this junker had already asked for a seat more than once elsewhere and everywhere had been refused. He asked in an irresolute and pitiful voice.
“Nikolushka…a letter…wounded…wa…was…ma ch&#232;re …wounded…my darling boy…my little countess…promoted to officer…thank God…How shall I tell my little countess?…”
“Go, go; he was killed in a battle, into which they led the best of Russian men and Russian glory to be killed. Go, Princess Marya. Go and tell Liza. I’ll come.”
Pierre knew very well what a hieroglyph was, but did not dare speak. He listened silently to the rhetor, feeling from it all that the testing was about to begin.
“You know it’s my greatest pleasure,” said Natasha. “That’s not nice—you’re going yourself, you’ve ordered the horses saddled, and you haven’t told us anything.”
During the entr’acte there was a gust of cold in H&#233;l&#232;ne’s box, the door opened, and Anatole came in, ducking his head and trying not to snag on anyone.
“I don’t like to keep company with the Bezukhov woman and I don’t advise it; but if you’ve already promised, go, divert yourself,” she added, addressing Natasha.
“And I will, I will, I’ll ruin myself as soon as possible. It’s none of your business. It will be bad for me, not for you. Leave me, leave me alone! I hate you!”
The friends were silent. Neither of them would begin talking. Pierre kept glancing at Prince Andrei; Prince Andrei was rubbing his forehead with his small hand.
“Yes, but entre nous, ”*85 said the countess, “it’s a pretext. He’s come, essentially, to see Count Kirill Vladimirovich, having learned that he was so poorly.”
“Well, that’s it,” thought Rostov, “he wants to test me!” His heart contracted and the blood rushed to his face. “Let him see whether I’m a coward,” he thought.
“But can one get through in a sleigh?” he asked the steward, who accompanied him back to the house, a respectable man, in face and manner resembling his master.
“Wine? Gluttony? Idleness? Laziness? Hot temper? Anger? Women?” he went through his vices, weighing them mentally, and did not know which to give preference to.
Boris smiled cautiously, so that his smile could be understood either as mockery or as approval of the joke, depending on how it was received. Everyone laughed.
“About Boris…I know,” she said seriously, “that’s what I came for. Don’t tell me, I know. No, tell me!” She took her hand away. “Tell me, mama. Isn’t he sweet?”
“Well, dear heart,” he said, “I wanted to tell you yesterday, and I’ve come to tell you today. I’ve never experienced anything like it. I’m in love, my friend.”
“Ah, you’ll just disturb the old man!” said the countess. “And there’s no room to turn around in his place. If you go anywhere, it should be to the Melyukovs’.”
“You could do it even now. You go to the barn and listen. If you hear banging or knocking, it’s bad; if you hear grain pouring, it’s good. But it also happens…”
“Why is it others see things, and I don’t?” she said. “Well, you sit down, Sonya; you must do it tonight,” she said. “In my place…I feel so frightened tonight!”
“How many inhabitants does Moscow have? How many houses? Is it true that Moscou  is called Moscou la sainte ? How many churches are there in Moscou ?” he asked.
“I don’t understand,” replied Andrei. “Les femmes comme il faut  are another matter; but les femmes  of Kuragin, les femmes et le vin, §82 I don’t understand!”
Prince Vassily pondered and winced. Anna Mikhailovna understood that he feared to find in her a rival over Count Bezukhov’s will. She hastened to reassure him.
“Well, you haven’t told me anything new.” And the old man muttered pensively to himself in a quick patter: “Dieu sait quand reviendra.  Go to the dining room.”
“But here, brother, the folk have gone clean wild. There it was all some kind of Poles, all under the Russian crown, but now, brother, it’s gone solid German.”
“Once he ” (he  was the enemy) “starts peppering the bridge,” the old soldier said gloomily, addressing his comrade, “you’ll forget about scratching yourself.”
“Who’s that bowing there? Junker Mironov! Not right, look at me!” shouted Denisov, who could not stay still and fidgeted on his horse in front of the squadron.
Two weeks after the receipt of the letter, in the evening, Prince Vassily’s people arrived in advance of him, and the next day he himself arrived with his son.
Anatole kissed the old man, then looked at him curiously and with perfect calm, expecting him to come out with something eccentric, as his father had promised.
That was perfectly correct, but the count, and the countess, and Natasha—everyone looked at her with reproach. “Who does she take after?” thought the countess.
He was happy with the gratitude shown him, but ashamed as he received it. This gratitude reminded him how much more  he could do for these simple, good people.
“Let me, miss, let me,” said the maid, getting on her knees, pulling at the dress, and moving the pins with her tongue from one side of her mouth to the other.
“Something very important is going on between them,” thought Pierre, and a joyful and at the same time bitter feeling stirred him and made him forget the game.
“Yes. Vous savez entre cousin et cousine cette intimit&#233; m&#232;ne quelquefois &#224; l’amour: le cousinage est un dangereux voisinage. N’est-ce pas? ”*352
Natasha knew she must leave, but she could not do it: something clenched her throat, and she looked at Prince Andrei impolitely, directly, with wide-open eyes.
“Ah, I’m so happy,” she replied, smiling through her tears, leaned closer to him, thought for a second, as if asking herself whether she could, and kissed him.
The count turned and to his right saw Mitka, who was looking at the count with popping eyes and, raising his cap,4 was pointing ahead of him to the other side.
A beautiful, thin, and pale Gypsy girl, with shining black eyes and black curly hair of a bluish sheen, in a red shawl, ran out with a sable coat over her arm.
The next day the emperor’s gentleman-in-waiting, M. de Turenne, came to Balashov and conveyed to him the emperor Napoleon’s wish to honor him with an audience.
“Beyond the Niemen?” Napoleon repeated. “So now you want me to withdraw beyond the Niemen? Merely the Niemen?” Napoleon repeated, looking straight at Balashov.
At first the old man stared at his son with fixed eyes and an unnatural smile that revealed his newly missing tooth, which Prince Andrei could not get used to.
“Yes, Prince, we meet here under such sad circumstances…Well, how is our dear patient?” she said, as if oblivious of the cold, insulting gaze directed at her.
“What’s wrong, dear,” she said crossly to the girl, who made her wait a few minutes. “You don’t want to serve me? Then I’ll find another place for you, miss.”
“Nothing to be done, my friend,” said the prince, “they’re all like that, no use unmarrying. Don’t be afraid; I won’t tell anybody; but you know it yourself.”
“Well, so, young cavalryman, how’s my Little Rook serving you?” he asked. (Little Rook was a saddle horse, recently broken, that Telyanin had sold to Rostov.)
“How, then? With all your mass you fell upon the unfortunate Mortier with his one division, and this Mortier slips between your fingers? Where’s the victory?”
A young officer, with an expression of perplexity and suffering on his face, walked away from the punished man, looking questioningly at the passing adjutant.
“Don’t be wicked,” Anna Pavlovna said from the other end of the table, shaking her finger, “c’est un si brave et excellent homme notre bon Viasmitinoff…” *234
“How can a sovereign be undecided?” thought Rostov, and then even this indecision seemed majestic and enchanting to Rostov, like everything the sovereign did.
“Et demandez-lui si les tirailleurs sont post&#233;s,”  he added. “Ce qu’ils font, ce qu’ils font!” ‡268 he said to himself, still not answering the Austrian.
Having said that, Napoleon rode on further to meet Marshal Lannes, who was riding up to the emperor, taking off his hat and congratulating him on the victory.
“My God, I’m a dishonest, lost man. A bullet in the head is all that’s left for me, not singing,” he thought. “Go away? but where? Never mind, let them sing!”
The cold and severe tone of this man whom he had almost always seen at balls with an amiable smile, in the society of the most brilliant women, struck Pierre.
Le chef de la garnison de Glogau avec dix mille hommes demande au Roi de Prusse, ce qu’il doit faire s’il est somm&#233; de se rendre?…Tout cela est positif.
He wanted several times to enter the conversation, but each time his word was thrown out, like a cork out of water; and he was unable to joke along with them.
“So I’m just like all the rest, when it’s not a matter of the chase. Well, but when it is, watch out!” was, as it seemed to Nikolai, what the dog’s look said.
“I cannot call on you, but can it be that I will never see you? I love you madly. Can it be never?…” And, blocking her way, he brought his face close to hers.
“Ah, why do such people as you have children? If you weren’t a father, I’d have nothing to reproach you for,” said Anna Pavlovna, raising her eyes pensively.
“If anybody else tries to get at me,” he said, slowly forcing the words through his compressed and thin lips, “I’ll chuck him down from here right now. So!…”
“How crystal clear all these young ones’ secrets are!” said Anna Mikhailovna, pointing to Nikolai as he left. “Cousinage dangereux voisinage,” *88 she added.
“Good-bye, dear heart,” she said to the countess, who came to see her to the door; “wish me success,” she added in a whisper, so that her son would not hear.
Princess Marya did not finish listening and, continuing with the thread of her thoughts, turned to her sister-in-law, her gentle eyes indicating her stomach.
“Where? At Bykov’s, at the Rat’s?…I knew it,” said a high-pitched voice, and after that Lieutenant Telyanin, a small officer from the same squadron, came in.
He sat beside Ippolit and, gathering the folds of his forehead, began a conversation about politics with him. Prince Andrei and the others stood around them.
When everything was ready, the swords stuck in the snow to mark the barrier to which they had to walk, and the pistols loaded, Nesvitsky came over to Pierre.
“Marie,” she said, leaving the embroidery frame and throwing herself backwards, “give me your hand.” She took the princess’s hand and placed it on her belly.
Natasha, no less proud of wearing a long gown for the first time, at a real ball, was still happier. The two girls wore white muslin gowns with pink ribbons.
While father and son were having a talk, a no less important talk was going on between mother and daughter. Natasha, excited, had come running to her mother.
When, having taken their things off and straightened themselves up after the journey, they all came to tea, Marya Dmitrievna kissed them all in proper order.
“Yes, of course it’s right,” said Anatole, who obviously was not listening to Dolokhov, and, with a smile that never left his face, he looked straight ahead.
“Eh bien, g&#233;n&#233;ral, tout est &#224; la guerre, &#224; ce qu’il parait,” §400 he said as if regretting the circumstance, of which he could not judge.
“He’s pure gold, my Mitenka,” the count added, smiling, when the young man went out. “Nothing’s ever impossible. I can’t stand that. Everything’s possible.”
“And tell Mr. Dolokhov that I won’t forget him, he should rest easy. And tell me, please, I keep forgetting to ask, how is he, how does he behave? And all…”
“I have it from good sources that the dowager empress is taking a lively interest in this whole affair. You know, she’s very favorable to H&#233;l&#232;ne.”
“No, why do you think,” Pierre suddenly began, lowering his head and looking like a butting bull, “why do you think that way? You shouldn’t think that way.”
“What boldness! Appeal through the chain of command. And take yourself away, away!…” And he began getting into the tunic that the valet was holding for him.
Boris, with his comrade Zhilinsky, also came to look at the Preobrazhensky banquet. On his way home, Boris noticed Rostov standing by the corner of a house.
He possessed in the highest degree that practical tenacity, lacking in Pierre, which kept things in motion without any big gestures and efforts on his part.
“Ohh! my beauty!” cried the count. “Better than any of you!…” He was about to embrace her, but she retreated, blushing, so as not to have her dress rumpled.
“Ah! there’s still light in the drawing room,” she said, pointing to the windows of the house, shining beautifully in the wet, velvet darkness of the night.
“But why shouldn’t I say what I saw? Other people see things! And who can catch me out about whether I did or didn’t see anything?” flashed in Sonya’s head.
“Don’t talk to me about that. What do I care?” he said. “I say that I’m madly, madly in love with you. Is it my fault that you’re exquisite?…It’s our turn.”
“I say, Balaga,” said Anatole, placing his hands on the man’s shoulders, “do you love me, or not? Eh? Now do me a service…What horses have you brought? Eh?”
Having driven up and down the length of Podnovinsky, Balaga began reining in and, turning back, stopped the horses at the intersection of Old Konyushennaya.
Before the room from which the sounds of the clavichord came, a pretty blonde Frenchwoman popped out of a side door. Mlle Bourienne seemed wildly ecstatic.
“Ah, mon ami.  I only pray to God and hope He will hear me. Andr&#233;,” she said timidly, after a moment’s silence, “I have a big request to make of you.”
“I don’t believe I’ve said anything to you, Masha, about reproaching my wife for anything or being displeased with her. Why are you saying all this to me?”
“Come here,” said Rostov, seizing Telyanin by the arm. He almost dragged him to the window. “That’s Denisov’s money, you took it…” he whispered in his ear.
“It’s all over, but I’m a coward, yes, I’m a coward,” thought Rostov and, sighing deeply, he took his lame Little Rook from the handler and began to mount.
The folds on his forehead, gathered till then, quickly released themselves as a sign of satisfaction, and, smiling slightly, he began to examine his nails.
Prince Andrei did not see how or by whom it was put back on him, but suddenly, on his chest over the uniform, a little icon on a fine gold chain turned up.
It was a cavalry general who had earned special favor from the sovereign during this campaign, the former commander of the division in which Rostov served.
“Rostov! Greetings! We haven’t seen each other,” he said and could not help asking what had happened to him: so strangely dark and upset was Rostov’s face.
It sometimes occurred to Natasha that he did not want to see her, and these surmises were confirmed by the sad tone in which the older people spoke of him.
“Little countess,” the count’s voice came from outside the door. “Are you asleep?” Natasha jumped up barefoot and, snatching her slippers, ran to her room.
“Good-bye, dear niece!” his voice cried out in the darkness, not the voice Natasha used to know, but the one that had sung “Late that evening in the wood.”
Natasha looked at Sonya with astonished eyes. Clearly, this question had presented itself to her for the first time, and she did not know how to answer it.
“If we start out with good luck, why shouldn’t we make it?” said Balaga. “We used to get you to Tver in seven hours. You surely remember, Your Excellency.”
A still greater feeling of pity, tenderness, and love took hold of Pierre. He felt tears flowing behind his spectacles and hoped they would not be noticed.
“Attendez-moi, je vais prendre mon ouvrage,”  she said. “Voyons, &#224; quoi pensez-vous?”  she turned to Prince Ippolit. “Apportez-moi mon reticule.” ‡38
“Comment, monsieur Pierre, vous trouvez que l’assassinat est grandeur d’&#226;me?” #58 said the little princess, smiling and drawing her work towards her.
“I’m very sorry for the poor count,” said the guest. “He was in poor health to begin with, and now this distress on account of his son. It will kill him!”
“Just a moment. Hey, you there!” he cried in a voice such as people use who are sure that those they call will come rushing to them. “Send Mitenka to me!”
Tables were set up for Boston, parties were chosen, and the count’s guests settled themselves in the two drawing rooms, the sitting room, and the library.
Prince Vassily looked questioningly at the princess, but could not tell whether she was considering what he had said to her, or was simply staring at him…
“You don’t mind, Your Honor?” he said, turning questioningly to Tushin. “I’ve strayed from my company, Your Honor; I don’t know where myself. Worse luck!”
“Why don’t you begin, Mikhail Larionovich?” the emperor Alexander hurriedly addressed Kutuzov, at the same time glancing courteously at the emperor Franz.
“There’s no need for you to tell him, I’ll tell him myself,” said the countess, indignant that someone had dared to consider her little Natasha a grownup.
Pierre hurriedly took out his purse, his watch, but for a long time could not get the wedding ring off his fat finger. When that was done, the Mason said:
A circle formed itself at once around Speransky, and the old man who had spoken of his subordinate Pryanichnikov also turned to Speransky with a question.
These nightly visits of Natasha, which took place before the count’s return from the club, were one of the favorite pleasures of both mother and daughter.
To the viscount, who was meeting him for the first time, it was clear that this Jacobin was not at all as frightening as his words. Everyone fell silent.
“They say the ball will be very nice,” replied the princess, her slightly mustached lip pulling upwards. “All the beautiful society women will be there.”
“Well, my good fellow, young prince what’s your name?” said Prince Nikolai Andreevich, turning to Anatole, “come here, let’s talk, let’s get acquainted.”
“‘To the head of the French Government, Au chef du gouvernement fran&#231;ais ,’” Dolgorukov said seriously and with satisfaction. “It’s good, isn’t it?”
“However, if you order it, Your Majesty,” said Kutuzov, raising his head and again changing his tone to that of a dull, unthinking, but obedient general.
“You seek the truth in order to follow its laws in life; consequently, you seek wisdom and virtue, is that it?” the rhetor said after a moment’s silence.
“Andr&#233;, pourquoi ne pas m’avoir pr&#233;venu?” ‡319 she said in mild reproach, standing in front of her wanderers like a hen in front of her chicks.
“There was one, there was one like that,” the doctor said as if joyfully. “Must have died, but anyhow I’ll check, I had lists. Do you have them, Makeev?”
Rostov went to the front hall again and noticed that there were already many officers and generals in full-dress uniform past whom he would have to walk.
Berg got up and, embracing his wife carefully, so as not to rumple her lace pelerine, for which he had paid dearly, kissed her in the middle of the lips.
Danilo rode silently, holding an unsheathed dagger in his left hand, and threshing the taut flanks of his brown horse with his whip as if it was a flail.
“Or that I should get upset that another man’s dog catches it and not mine—all I want is to admire the chase, isn’t that so, Count? Then, in my opinion…”
“She’s worn out, she ran him down three times by herself,” Nikolai said, also not listening to anyone and not caring whether anyone was listening to him.
But the countess did not want to put the question that way: she did not want a sacrifice from her son, she would have liked to sacrifice herself for him.
There was a patter of feet on the steps of the servants’ porch, a loud creak on the last step, where the snow lay drifted, and the old maid’s voice said:
“Ah, Sonya, if you knew him as I do! He said…He asked me what sort of promise I had made to Bolkonsky. He was glad that it rested with me to refuse him.”
“I thought today’s f&#234;te was cancelled. Je vous avoue que toutes ces f&#234;tes et tous ces feux d’artifice commencent &#224; devenir insipides. ”†6
“Le g&#233;n&#233;ral Koutouzoff,”  said Bolkonsky, emphasizing the last syllable, zoff , like a Frenchman, “a bien voulu de moi pour aide-de-camp…” ‡45
“Yes, if he had taken that power and, without using it for murder, given it to the lawful king,” said the viscount, “then I would call him a great man.”
That was the count’s favorite dance, which he used to dance while still in his youth. (“Daniel Cooper” was in fact one of the figures of the anglaise .)
“What about it, Fedeshou!…Did he say when the fighting would begin? You were standing closer. They all said Boonapart himself was stationed in Brunovo.”
“Ah…” said Kutuzov, glancing at Bolkonsky, as if with this word he was inviting the adjutant to wait, and went on with the conversation begun in French.
“Do you realize what you’re saying?” he said in a trembling voice. “Besides me, there was no one else in the room. Which means, if that’s not it, then…”
The French had been beaten off for the last time. And again, in total darkness, Tushin’s guns, as if framed by the humming infantry, moved on somewhere.
“Ah! a good thing. So, my dear, you want to serve your tsar and country? It’s wartime. Such a fine fellow must serve, must serve. So, off to the front?”
“I? I? What have I got to do with it? Leave me out of it. It’s not I who am getting married. What about you,  miss? That’s what it’s desirable to know.”
“And still the only thing I love and cherish is triumph over all of them, I cherish that mysterious power and glory hovering over me here in this mist!”
And the feeling of energy with which the troops had set out for action began to turn into vexation and anger at the muddleheaded orders and the Germans.
“What’s the matter, darling? You’re pale. Ah, you’re very pale,” Princess Marya said fearfully, rushing to her sister-in-law with her heavy, soft steps.
“I can’t tear myself in two,” said the doctor. “Come to Makar Alexeevich’s in the evening, I’ll be there.” The assistant asked him about something else.
“Yes, yes,” Pierre agreed, looking at his friend with tender and sad eyes. The brighter Prince Andrei’s fate seemed to him, the gloomier seemed his own.
“You don’t understand?” the prince was shouting. “But I do! French spy! Bonaparte’s slave and spy, out of my house—out, I say!” and he slammed the door.
Natasha stood up and curtsied to the magnificent countess. Natasha was so pleased to be praised by this brilliant beauty that she blushed with pleasure.
“For God’s sake, Sonya, don’t tell anyone, don’t torment me,” Natasha pleaded. “Remember, it’s wrong to interfere in such things. I revealed it to you…”
Paying no attention to Balashov, the under-officer started talking with his comrades about regimental matters and did not glance at the Russian general.
The story was very nice and interesting, especially the moment when the rivals suddenly recognized each other, and the ladies, it seemed, were stirred.
“They will, they will,” said Nesvitsky. “No, but what I’d like,” he added, chewing a little pie with his handsome, moist mouth, “is to climb in there.”
“Ah, it’s that same captain who stood without boots in the canteen,” thought Prince Andrei, glad to have identified the pleasant, philosophizing voice.
“It seems I can congratulate you,” Anna Pavlovna whispered to the princess and kissed her warmly. “If it weren’t for my migraine, I would have stayed.”
“Je vous aime!”  he said, having remembered what needed to be said on these occasions; but the words sounded so meager that he felt ashamed of himself.
“No, without joking, father, is she very ugly? Eh?” he asked in French, as if continuing a conversation they had had more than once during the journey.
“Well, what do you want, then? You’re all in love these days. Well, if you’re in love, marry him,” the countess said, laughing crossly. “God help you!”
Prince Andrei had no time to answer him. The servants came out to meet them, and he asked them where the old prince was and how soon they expected him.
Prince Andrei’s room was on the middle floor; there were also people in the rooms above him, and they were not asleep. He heard feminine talk overhead.
Just then the arrival of Count Bezukhov was announced. The two spouses exchanged self-satisfied smiles, each silently claiming the honor of this visit.
“How good! Excellent, really,” said Nikolai with a sort of involuntary disdain, as if he was ashamed to confess that he found the sounds very pleasing.
“I’d like to know whether you loved…” Pierre did not know what to call Anatole, and he blushed at the thought of him, “whether you loved that bad man?”
The viscount bowed as a sign of submission and smiled politely. Anna Pavlovna circled around the viscount and invited everyone to listen to his story.
Natasha did not like the tone of condescension to childish talk in which the guest addressed her. She made no reply and gave the guest a serious look.
The brisk song gave a special meaning to the tone of casual merriment with which Zherkov spoke, and to the intentional coldness of Dolokhov’s replies.
“Oh, oh!” gasped Nesvitsky, as if from burning pain, seizing the officer of the suite by the arm. “Look, he’s fallen, one of them has fallen, fallen!”
“Pourquoi? Je vous aime plus que jamais,”  said Princess Marya, “et je t&#226;cherai de faire tout ce qui est en mon pouvoir pour votre bonheur.” †253
At the beginning of March, the old count Ilya Andreevich Rostov was taken up with arranging a dinner at the English Club in honor of Prince Bagration.
“Gentlemen,” he said, after keeping the bank for a while, “I ask you to put your money on your cards, otherwise I may get confused in the accounting.”
He was red, all in a sweat, though it was not hot in the room. And his face was frightful and pitiful, especially in its impotent desire to seem calm.
“You owe me forty-three thousand, Count,” said Dolokhov, and he stood up from the table and stretched. “It’s tiring, though, to sit so long,” he said.
“We’ve been asking and asking, Your Honor,” said the old soldier, his lower jaw trembling. “He passed away this morning. We’re people, too, not dogs…”
“That, ma ch&#232;re,  is a bright idea,” the old count picked up, all aroused. “Let me dress up now, and I’ll go with you. I’ll rouse Pashette, too.”
To see things like that, our eye must be directed by passion. For it is passion that by its flash illuminates an object, intensifying its appearance.
Graciously, but still smiling, she withdrew, turned, and looked at her husband. Prince Andrei’s eyes were shut, which made him look tired and sleepy.
“Mon dieu, mon dieu!”  said the princess, and taking up a fold of her dress in one hand, she went over to her husband and kissed him on the forehead.
Princess Anna Mikhailovna mixed into the conversation, clearly wishing to show her connections and her knowledge of all the circumstances of society.
“There’s gratitude, there’s thankfulness to people who have sacrificed everything for him,” she said. “Wonderful! Very fine! I need nothing, Prince.”
Meanwhile, the officer of the suite, who was standing in front, was pointing something out to the general; the general was looking through the glass.
“But what an extraordinary genius!” Prince Andrei cried suddenly, clenching his small fist and pounding it on the table. “And what luck the man has!”
“Ils sont arriv&#233;s, Marie, *239 do you know?” said the little princess, waddling in with her belly and lowering herself heavily into an armchair.
It was clear that this strong, strange man was under the irresistible influence produced on him by this dark-haired, graceful girl who loved another.
The moment he went in, he saw that the nanny was hiding something from him with a frightened look, and that Princess Marya was no longer by the crib.
“I ordered you not to let them eat that root, Mashka’s or whatever!” shouted Denisov. “I saw it myself, Lazarchuk was bringing some from the fields.”
“Yes, sir, Your Honor,” the soldier said with pleasure, rolling his eyes and drawing himself up still more zealously, but not budging from his place.
Prince Andrei did not know Arakcheev personally and had never seen him, but everything he knew about him inspired little respect in him for this man.
“Well, do you recognize your old mischievous friend?” asked the countess. Boris kissed Natasha’s hand and said he was surprised at the change in her.
“She and Pyotr Ilyich are standing across from the Zharovo thicket,” Semyon replied, smiling. “She may be a lady, but she knows a lot about hunting.”
Anatole had a passport, travel documents, ten thousand roubles taken from his sister, and ten thousand borrowed through the intermediary of Dolokhov.
Several days after Anatole’s departure, Pierre received a note from Prince Andrei, informing him of his arrival and asking Pierre to come to see him.
“No, you know, this Anatole costs me forty thousand a year,” he said, obviously unable to restrain the melancholy course of his thoughts. He paused.
“What have you done to mademoiselle  Scherer? She’ll be quite ill now,” said Prince Andrei, coming into his study and rubbing his small white hands.
“Ma ch&#232;re, il y a un temps pour tout,” *86 said the countess, feigning sternness. “You always spoil her, &#201;lie ,” she added to her husband.
“Take a glass of boiled water and put in une pinc&#233;e ” (with his slender fingers he showed what une pinc&#233;e  meant) “de cremortartari…” ‡118
She got up and straightened her hair, which was always, even now, so extraordinarily smooth that it seemed varnished and of one piece with her head.
Just then two horsemen appeared on the road from town along which signalmen had been posted. They were an adjutant with a Cossack riding behind him.
“The general in chief is busy,” said Kozlovsky, hastily going up to the unknown general and barring his way to the door. “How shall I announce you?”
“Good-bye, dear heart,” said Tushin, “you good soul! Good-bye, dear heart,” Tushin said with tears, which for some reason suddenly came to his eyes.
Tikhon, like all good valets, instinctively knew his master’s train of thought. He guessed that he was being asked about Prince Vassily and his son.
“Mais qu’on ne fasse pas de mal &#224; mon petit cheval,”  the Alsatian said good-naturedly to Rostov, when the horse was handed over to the hussar.
“Will you go to Iogel’s, Nikolenka? Please do,” Natasha said to him, “he has asked you specially, and Vassily Dmitrich (that is, Denisov) is going.”
Having returned to the regiment and told the commander about the state of Denisov’s case, Rostov rode on to Tilsit with the letter to the sovereign.
Everything fell silent again, but Prince Andrei knew that she was still sitting up there, he heard an occasional quiet stirring, an occasional sigh.
Pierre’s gloomy, unhappy face struck her. She stopped in front of him. She wanted to help him, to transfer to him the overflow of her own happiness.
But just then Berg came up to Pierre, insistently begging him to take part in an argument between the general and the colonel about Spanish affairs.
“Forgive me,” said Prince Andrei, “but you’re so young, and I’ve already experienced so much of this life. I fear for you. You don’t know yourself.”
That evening Marya Dmitrievna went to the Arkharovs and suggested that the girls come with her. Natasha stayed home under the pretext of a headache.
“My dear,” Anatole answered in French (as the whole conversation went on), “I don’t consider myself obliged to answer questions put in such a tone.”
“It’s a week since the campaign began, and you failed to defend Vilno. You’re cut in two and thrown out of the Polish provinces. Your army murmurs…”
“You manage to do everything at the wrong time,” said Vera. “The way you came running into the drawing room just now, everyone was ashamed of you.”
And again she burst out crying more bitterly than before. Natasha pulled her up, hugged her, and, smiling through her tears, began to reassure her.
“Ah!” said Kutuzov. “I hope this lesson will set you straight. Serve well. Our sovereign is merciful. And I won’t forget you, if you prove worthy.”
The little princess was much changed. She was rather more bad- than good-looking now. Her cheeks sagged, her lip rose up, her eyes were drawn down.
“Mais vous me m&#233;prisez, vous si pure, vous ne comprendrez jamais cet &#233;garement de la passion. Ah, ce n’est que ma pauvre m&#232;re…” ‡254
“I’ll kill you!” he shouted, and with a strength as yet unknown to him, he seized the marble slab from a table, took a step towards her, and swung.
“Why aren’t you playing?” said Dolokhov. And, strangely, Nikolai felt the need to take a card, stake an insignificant sum on it, and begin to play.
“But I didn’t say a word about the sovereign,” the officer defended himself, unable to explain Rostov’s outburst otherwise than by his being drunk.
It was now the hot period of spring. The woods were now fully clothed, it was dusty and so hot that, passing by water, one wanted to go for a swim.
“It’s a small estate that brought no income,” replied Bolkonsky, so as not to vex the old man for nothing, and trying to soften his act before him.
The Rostovs praised her taste and attire and, mindful of their dresses and hair, put themselves into the carriages at eleven o’clock and drove off.
“Yes, Nikita, please go…” (“but where shall I send him?”). “Yes, go to the yard and bring a rooster, please; yes, and you, Misha, bring some oats.”
“Look, his mustache and eyelashes are all white,” said one of those strange, pretty, and unfamiliar-looking people with fine eyebrows and mustache.
“Well, good-bye, Your Excellency, be well,” said Rastopchin, getting up with his peculiarly quick movements and holding out his hand to the prince.
Anatole Kuragin asked what her impression of the performance was, and told her that during the previous performance, Semyonova had fallen on stage.
“From what I’ve heard,” Pierre, blushing, again mixed into the conversation, “almost all the nobility have already gone over to Bonaparte’s side.”
“She said…yes, she said: ‘Girl’ (to the femme de chambre ), ‘put on a livr&#233;e  and come with me, behind the carriage, faire des visites .’”*65
“Do you remember me?” Boris said quietly, with a pleasant smile. “I’ve come to see the count with my mother, but it seems he’s not entirely well.”
“How is the health of…” He hesitated, not knowing whether it was proper to call the dying man “count” yet he was embarrassed to call him “father.”
“La comtesse Apraksine, la pauvre, a perdu son mari et elle a pleur&#233; les larmes de ses yeux,” †166 she said, becoming more and more animated.
“Look at ’em scurrying! He  fires off a cold one, and you’d think they were all getting killed,” a warrant officer said angrily and reproachfully.
“Devil knows what they’re up to!” Denisov grumbled. “Ah! Rostov!” he cried to the junker, noticing his cheerful face. “Well, you’re done waiting!”
Przebyszewski and his corps laid down their arms. Other columns, having lost about half their men, were retreating in disorderly, confused crowds.
“Really, papa, I think Prince Bagration made less fuss preparing for the battle of Sch&#246;ngraben than you’re doing now,” the son said, smiling.
“I’m so glad you’ve come!” Natasha said without replying. “We’re having such fun! Vassily Dmitrich is staying one more day for my sake, you know!”
It had been decided to appear at the ball at half past ten, but Natasha still had to dress, and they still had to drive to the Tavrichesky Garden.
“Well, and what, what then? What did he say? Natasha, I’m so glad you’re not angry with me. Tell me everything, the whole truth. What did he say?”
“I’ll drink it, give me a bottle of rum!” Pierre cried, pounding the table with a determined and drunken gesture, and he climbed into the window.
“But we cannot wait, Prince, at such a moment. Pensez, il y va du salut de son &#226;me…Ah! c’est terrible, les devoirs d’un chr&#233;tien… ”†101
Having listened to these words, the regimental commander hung his head, silently heaved his shoulders, and spread his arms in a sanguine gesture.
“One shy of a million,” a merry soldier in a torn greatcoat, passing close by, said with a wink and vanished; after him came another old soldier.
And Denisov rode off to a group that had stopped not far from Rostov: the regimental commander, Nesvitsky, Zherkov, and the officer of the suite.
The troops stirred again, and two battalions of the Novgorodsky regiment and a battalion of the Apsheronsky regiment moved on past the sovereign.
“We haven’t seen each other for long time,” he said. “Thank you for coming. Let me just finish the game, and Ilyushka will come with the chorus.”
“Last year N. N. received a snuffbox with a portrait,” said l’homme &#224; l’&#233;sprit profond,  “why shouldn’t S. S. receive the same reward?”
“And that fat one in spectacles is the universal Freemason,” said Mme Peronsky, pointing to Bezukhov. “Set him next to his wife: a real tomfool!”
“Here’s another acquaintance, Bolkonsky, see, mama?” said Natasha, pointing to Prince Andrei. “Remember, he spent the night with us at Otradnoe.”
And, as always when she spoke of Pierre, she began telling anecdotes about his absentmindedness, anecdotes which had even been made up about him.
After tea, Nikolai, Sonya, and Natasha went to the sitting room, to their favorite corner, where their most heartfelt conversations always began.
“No, quite the opposite—he had a cheerful face, and he turned to me,” and the moment she said it, she herself thought she had seen what she said.
“No, Sonya, I can’t anymore!” said Natasha. “I can’t conceal it from you anymore. You know, we love each other!…Sonya, darling, he writes…Sonya…”
Anna Pavlovna had already managed to speak with Liza about the match she was contriving between Anatole and the little princess’s sister-in-law.
“See what egoists all men are; all, all egoists! For the sake of his whims, God knows why, he abandons me, he locks me up in the country alone.”
Dolokhov was holding the Englishman by the hand and clearly, distinctly articulating the terms of the bet, mainly addressing Anatole and Pierre.
“I’ll be perfectly frank with you,” said Anna Mikhailovna. “There are few of us old friends left! That’s why I cherish your friendship so much.”
“No, I must treat you to Kuragin,” Bilibin said softly to Bolkonsky. “He’s charming when he argues about politics, you should see such gravity.”
“I understand one thing, that it’s all vile, vile, vile,” said Prince Andrei, and he went to the house where the commander in chief was staying.
Bagration, of medium height, with a firm and immobile face of the Oriental type, dry, not yet an old man, came out after the commander in chief.
“See, he wants to have a look at a battle,” Zherkov said to Bolkonsky, pointing to the auditor, “but he’s got a knot in the pit of his stomach.”
“Here they come with another one!” said one of the officers, pointing to a captured French dragoon whom two Cossacks were leading along on foot.
“Well, greetings, mon cher, ” said Dolgorukov, who was having tea with Bilibin. “The f&#234;te is tomorrow. How’s your old man? In a bad humor?”
On the way home, Prince Andrei could not help asking Kutuzov, who was sitting silently next to him, what he thought about the next day’s battle.
“Allez voir, mon cher, si la troisi&#232;me division a d&#233;pass&#233; le village. Dites-lui de s’arr&#234;ter et d’attendre mes ordres.” †267
“And why should you believe that he is my lover?…Why? Because I like his company? If you were more intelligent and agreeable, I’d prefer yours.”
For two days after that, Rostov did not see Dolokhov at his house and could not find him at home; on the third day, he received a note from him.
“Very well,” the rhetor said hastily, evidently fully satisfied with this reply. “Have you sought the means of achieving your goal in religion?”
Having learned at the last posting station that Prince Andrei was not at Bald Hills, but at his newly allotted estate, Pierre went to him there.
From the porch a broad stairway led straight up; to the right he saw a closed door. Under the stairway was the door leading to the ground floor.
“Ah, you’re here!” said Sonya, giving a start, and she came over and listened. “I don’t know. A storm?” she said timidly, afraid of being wrong.
And it suddenly became clear to Sonya that Natasha had some terrible plan for that night. Sonya knocked on her door. Natasha did not let her in.
“Pap&#225;, we’ll be late,” said Princess H&#233;l&#232;ne, who was waiting at the door, turning her beautiful head on her classical shoulders.
“It would be nice to go to Kuragin’s,” he thought. But at once he remembered the word of honor he had given Prince Andrei not to visit Kuragin.
“And do you want to kiss me?” she whispered barely audibly, looking at him from under her eyebrows, smiling and almost weeping with excitement.
“We’ve said our good-byes…off with you!” he said suddenly. “Off with you!” he shouted in a loud and angry voice, opening the door of the study.
“God knows what the people here may think,” Telyanin murmured, seizing his peaked cap and going into a small empty room, “we must have a talk…”
“It’s unlikely that I’ll take advantage of your hospitality, gentlemen, and it’s now time for me to go,” Bolkonsky said, glancing at his watch.
They dismounted and went into the sutler’s tent. Several officers with flushed and languorous faces were sitting at tables eating and drinking.
“I humbly thank you, I’ll go by myself now,” said Prince Andrei, wishing to rid himself of the staff officer, “don’t trouble yourself, please.”
Rostov remembered at that moment a strange conversation he had once had with Dolokhov. “Only fools can gamble on luck,” Dolokhov had said then.
The smile vanished from Speranksy’s white face, and his physiognomy gained much from it. He probably found Prince Andrei’s thought interesting.
“Why should I get into it! Your dogs—right you are!—you paid a village for each of them, they cost thousands. You match yours, and I’ll watch!”
“I’m not afraid,” Sonya’s voice replied, and her little feet, screeching and squeaking in their thin shoes, went down the path towards Nikolai.
“Natasha,” she said, “you asked me not to speak to you, and I didn’t, you yourself began it now. Natasha, I don’t trust him. Why this secrecy?”
“How will it be in five years, if it goes on like this? Voil&#224; l’avantage d’&#234;tre p&#232;re. §21 Is she rich, this princess of yours?”
“Attention!” cried Dolokhov and pulled the officer from the window. Getting tangled in his spurs, the boy jumped down awkwardly into the room.
“Mama! what’s for dessert?” cried Natasha, boldly now and with capricious merriment, certain beforehand that her escapade would be taken well.
“Devilish billeters! The fifth company’s already tucked into the village, see, they’ll have their kasha boiled, and we’ve still got no place.”
“At least to put a fright into those little nuns. There are some Italian girls, young ones, they say. Really, I’d give five years of my life!”
“Well, let’s give it a try, Captain, see how far it will carry!” said the general, turning to the artillerist. “Have some fun out of boredom.”
“Look, they’re scurrying around! It’s burning! Look at the smoke! Fine work! Grand! What smoke, what smoke!” said the crews, growing animated.
Tushin turned around, frightened. It was the same staff officer who had driven him out of Grunt. He was shouting at him in a breathless voice:
(That was true: the architect had said it was needed, and Pierre, not knowing why himself, was redecorating his enormous house in Petersburg.)
“Since the adversaries have refused a reconciliation, kindly begin: take your pistols and at the word three start walking towards each other.”
“Princess, dearest, somebody’s driving down the avenue!” she said, holding the frame and not closing it. “With lanterns. Must be the dokhtur.”
He said that Masonry is the teaching of Christianity, freed of state17 and religious fetters; the teaching of equality, brotherhood, and love.
“I came, my good sir, and people tell me: a great blessing has been revealed, the holy Mother of God has blessed oil dripping from her cheek…”
Denisov slapped him on the shoulder and quickly began pacing the room without looking at Rostov, something he did in moments of inner turmoil.
“Je voudrais voir le grand homme, ”*326 he said, referring to Napoleon, whom, until then, like everyone else, he had always called Buonaparte.
“No, I was only surprised that you’ve left the regiment. Dans un moment je suis &#224; vous, ”*329 he replied to a voice that was calling him.
After the roast, champagne was served. The guests got up from their places to congratulate the old prince. Princess Marya also went up to him.
“Natalie, un mot, un seul,”  he kept repeating, apparently not knowing what to say, and he repeated it until H&#233;l&#232;ne came up to them.
“Go in, Annette, you’ll catch cold,” said the little princess, taking leave of Anna Pavlovna. “C’est arr&#234;t&#233;,” *66 she added softly.
“Sonya!” she said suddenly, as if guessing the real reason for her cousin’s distress. “Vera must have talked with you after dinner? Did she?”
The beauty went to the aunt, but Anna Pavlovna kept Pierre by her, making it look as though she had to give some last necessary instructions.
“Stop them!” he cried, and at the same time, probably realizing that it was impossible to stop them, spurred his horse and rode to the right.
By five o’clock in the afternoon, the battle had been lost at all points. More than a hundred cannon had already been captured by the French.
And the count turned to the chef, who, with an intelligent and respectful face, glanced at the father and son observantly and affectionately.
“Because consider, Count, if I were to allow myself to marry now, not having definite means of supporting my wife, I would be acting basely…”
Nikolai caught up with the first troika. They drove down some sort of hill and came out on a wide trampled road across a meadow by the river.
“Your health!” said Balaga, also drinking his glass and wiping his mouth with his handkerchief. Makarin, tears in his eyes, embraced Anatole.
“What makes me? I don’t know. I have to. Besides, I’m going…” He paused. “I’m going because this life I lead here, this life—is not for me!”
“Try to serve well and be worthy,” he added, sternly addressing Boris. “I’m glad…You’re here on leave?” he dictated in his passionless tone.
“Ah, he’s in such a terrible state! You wouldn’t recognize him, he’s so poorly, so poorly; I stayed only a minute and didn’t say two words…”
“I wonder if it’s not too late to give extreme unction?” the lady asked, adding his clerical title, as if she had no opinion on the subject.
Andrei said nothing: he was both pleased and displeased that his father understood him. The old man got up and handed the letter to his son.
“And that other one, the Austriak with him, it’s like he’s all smeared with chalk. White as flour! I s’pose they clean him like ammunition!”
He spilled the fire, smashed the pipe, and threw it away. Then he paused and suddenly glanced merrily at Rostov with his shining black eyes.
“For all of you,” he added, addressing the approaching officer. “Get well, lads,” he said to the soldiers, “there’s still a lot to be done.”
“Soldiers say it’s nimbler barefoot,” said Captain Tushin with a timorous smile, evidently wishing to turn his awkward position into a joke.
Her voice, Mlle Bourienne’s, and Katya’s, who was laughing about something, blended into a merry warbling which resembled the song of birds.
“No, Prince. Our regiment is already on the march. But I’m enlisted—what am I enlisted in, papa?” Anatole turned with a laugh to his father.
The remains of Langeron’s and Dokhturov’s troops, mixed together, crowded around the dams and banks of the ponds near the village of Augesd.
Hearing this cry and seeing to whom it was addressed, Nesvitsky and Pierre’s neighbor on the right turned fearfully and hastily to Bezukhov.
“For them everything’s the same,” thought Nikolai, peeking into the drawing room, where he saw Vera and his mother with the little old lady.
“I must tell you that I don’t believe, don’t…believe in God,” Pierre said with regret and effort, feeling the need to speak the whole truth.
“You got angry that he hadn’t written down those seven hundred roubles. But he had carried them over, and you didn’t look at the next page.”
“We’re philosophizing,” said Natasha, glancing at him for a moment, and continuing the conversation. The conversation had gone on to dreams.
Mrs. Melyukov was a widow with children of various ages, along with their governesses and governors, who lived three miles from the Rostovs.
“Yes, he’s a pleasant young man…Why do you ask me that?” said Princess Marya, still thinking about her morning conversation with her father.
In Mrs. Akhrosimov’s front hall, the valet, helping Pierre out of his fur coat, said that Marya Dmitrievna asked him to come to her bedroom.
It was past two o’clock and no one was asleep yet when the quartermaster appeared with orders to set out for the little village of Ostrovna.
Prince Andrei, who evidently wanted to soften the awkwardness of Pierre’s speech, got up, intending to leave and making a sign to his wife.
It was amusing and touching to look at these enamoured girls, but the sight of them evidently did not arouse any pleasant feelings in Vera.
“Of course you don’t,” said Vera, “because there can never be anything bad in my actions. But I shall tell mama how you behave with Boris.”
“Mon prince, ‘errare humanum est,’ mais…” ‡96 the doctor replied, swallowing his r ’s and pronouncing the Latin words with a French accent.
“This meeting might be hard on him, ch&#232;re  Anna Mikhailovna,” he said. “Let’s wait till evening; the doctors have predicted a crisis.”
“Come on, come on, my gallant! I was the only one to tell your father the truth when chance smiled on him,33 and to you, too, God willing.”
“Gone? Well, that’s good!” he said, gave the unconscious little princess an angry look, shook his head reproachfully, and slammed the door.
Rostov took the money, avoiding Telyanin’s eyes, and, not saying a word, started out of the room. But at the door he stopped and came back.
“I’ll stop by those nuns, really,” he said to the officers, who were looking at him smilingly, and rode down the hill along a winding path.
“Non, non, non! Quand votre p&#232;re m’&#233;crira, que vous vous conduisez bien, je vous donnerai ma main &#224; baiser. Pas avant.” †251
“I bid you welcome. I know, I know,” said the count, kissing and embracing Denisov. “Nikolushka wrote to us…Natasha, Vera, here’s Denisov.”
“Villains! Scoundrels!” cried the old man, pulling his face away from her. “To destroy an army, to destroy men! Why? Go, go and tell Liza.”
They approached a flooded river, which they had to cross by ferry. While the carriage and horses were being loaded, they boarded the ferry.
Princess Marya apologized to Amalia Evgenievna and to her father for herself and for the butler Filipp, who asked her to intercede for him.
M&#233;tivier, shrugging his shoulders, went over to Mlle Bourienne, who, hearing the shouting, had come running from the neighboring room.
“Take this and deliver it,” the minister of war said to his adjutant, handing him the papers and still paying no attention to the courier.
“Well, Matvevna, old girl, don’t let us down!” he said, moving away from the gun, when a strange, unfamiliar voice rang out over his head.
For her part, Mlle Bourienne did not miss her chance, at the word Paris,  to enter as well into the general conversation of reminiscences.
Seeing the impression the news of her brother’s wound made on Sonya, Natasha felt for the first time the whole grievous side of this news.
The Cossacks let the horse go for two gold pieces, and Rostov, who now, having received money, was the richest of the officers, bought it.
“It’s scary, brother, the troops we’ve gathered! Last night I looked, when they lit the fires, there was no end of them. Moscow—in short!”
Having ridden past some Austrian troops, Rostov noticed that the next part of the line (this was the guards) had already gone into action.
The grand master rapped with his hammer, everyone sat down in their places, and one brother read a sermon about the necessity of humility.
After which Anna Pavlovna led the conversation towards the courage and firmness of the Prussian king, in order to bring Boris into things.
She could not fall asleep for a long time. She kept thinking that no one could understand all that she understood and all that was in her.
Nikolai, not responding to the hunter, asked his sister and Petya to wait for him and rode to the place where Ilagin’s hostile hunt stood.
“This part here he doesn’t do right,” the uncle said suddenly with an energetic gesture. “He should pour it on—right you are!—pour it on.”
“I can’t tell, I don’t know. It’s nobody’s fault,” said Natasha, “it’s my fault. But it’s all terribly painful. Oh, why doesn’t he come!…”
“He knows everything,” said Marya Dmitrievna, pointing to Pierre and addressing Natasha. “Let him tell you whether I’ve spoken the truth.”
“Wherever you are, there is depravity and evil,” Pierre said to his wife. “Anatole, come, I must have a talk with you,” he said in French.
“It makes no difference,” said Prince Andrei. “Tell Countess Rostov that she was and is completely free and that I wish her all the best.”
“I beg Your Majesty’s pardon,” said Balashov, “besides Russia there is also Spain, where there are just as many churches and monasteries.”
In the best, the friendliest and simplest relations, flattery or praise is necessary, just as grease is necessary to keep wheels turning.
“She’s not quite well,” Mlle Bourienne replied with a cheerful smile, “she won’t be coming out. It’s so understandable in her condition.”
“As you see. So far everything’s fine; but I confess, my wish, and it’s a great one, is to become an adjutant and not stay at the front.”
“Tafa-lafa, and there’s no telling what he’s mumbling,” a soldier said, mimicking the general as he rode off. “I’d shoot the scoundrels!”
“Who do you want?” asked the officer. “The commander in chief? He was killed by a cannonball, hit in the chest in front of our regiment.”
“Indeed,” Princess Marya picked up, “you may be right. I’ll go. Courage, mon ange! ”†283 She kissed Liza and was about to leave the room.
“My darling!” he spoke words he had never said to her before. “God is merciful…” She looked at him questioningly with childlike reproach.
Moving money forward, Dolokhov prepared to keep the bank. Rostov sat beside him and at first did not play. Dolokhov kept glancing at him.
“It’s all over, I’m lost!” he thought. “A bullet in the head is all that’s left to me,” and at the same time he said in a cheerful voice:
Prince Andrei took Pierre to his rooms, which always awaited him in perfect order in his father’s house, and went himself to the nursery.
“Good day to you, Your Honor, sir!” the soldier shouted out, rolling his eyes at Rostov and obviously taking him for a hospital superior.
“What now?” said Pierre, looking with surprise at his friend’s strange animation and noticing the glance he cast at Natasha as he got up.
“How I’d love him!” said Natasha, guessing his thought at once, “but I know you want there to be no pretexts for blaming yourself or me.”
“A seasoned one?” asked Ilagin, approaching the hunter who had spotted the hare and turning, not without excitement, to whistle up Yerza…
“Listen, if you please, little countess,” she said to Natasha with a smile very much like the uncle’s smile. “He plays nicely,” she said.
Stopping his horses again, Nikolai looked around. Around him was the same magical plain drenched in moonlight, with stars strewn over it.
“Nikolenka, you’re talking nonsense—keep quiet, keep quiet! Keep quiet, I tell you!” she almost shouted, in order to drown out his voice.
Behind the door, slippered footsteps were heard and shouts: “Spies, traitors, traitors everywhere! Not a moment’s peace in my own house!”
“Yes, yes, I love him!” thought Natasha, rereading the letter for the twentieth time and seeking some special, deep meaning in each word.
Noticing on Balashov’s face the unpleasant impression produced by this reception, Davout raised his head and coldly asked what he wanted.
So thought Prince Andrei as he listened to the debate, and he came to his senses only when Paulucci called him and everybody was leaving.
“Never, Marya Genrikhovna,” the officer replied, “we must wait upon our doctor. Maybe he’ll pity me when he’s cutting off my leg or arm.”
“Ne me tourmentez pas. Eh bien, qu’a-t-on d&#233;cid&#233; par rapport &#224; la d&#233;p&#234;che de Novosilzoff? 2Vous savez tout.” ‡7
“Bonjour, ma ch&#232;re, je vous f&#233;licite,”  said the guest. “Quelle d&#233;licieuse enfant!” †87 she added, turning to the mother.
“The count is suffering both physically and morally, and it seems you have taken care to cause him as much moral suffering as possible.”
Adieu, ch&#232;re et bonne amie, que notre divin Sauveur et sa tr&#232;s sainte M&#232;re vous aient en leur sainte et puissante garde.
“Only fools and profligates can be unwell, my boy, and you know me: I’m busy from morning till evening, I’m temperate, and so I’m well.”
And the regimental commander, reflected as in a mirror, invisibly to himself, in the hussar officer, bounced, came forward, and replied:
“I’ll have the horse brought, then,” said Rostov, wishing to be rid of Telyanin, and he went to give orders for the horse to be brought.
“Well, generally, talk as much as possible. Audiences are his passion; but he neither likes nor is able to talk himself, as you’ll see.”
“And the other one’s not here! They’ve already spread the gossip,” he thought about the little princess, who was not in the dining room.
“Je comprends tout,” §255 Princess Marya answered with a sad smile. “Calm down, my friend. I’ll go to my father,” she said and went out.
A strange feeling of spite and along with that of respect for the calmness of this figure came together at that moment in Rostov’s soul.
“Get through these hundred steps and I’m saved for sure; stand here another two minutes and I’m sure to be dead,” each man was thinking.
When Princess Marya came into his study at the usual time, he was standing and working at his lathe, but, as usual, did not turn to her.
“Yes, gentlemen, I’ve been told there’s a rumor going around Moscow that I’m a cardsharper, so I advise you to be more careful with me.”
Returning from leave this time, Rostov felt and realized for the first time how strong his bond was with Denisov and the whole regiment.
“Ah, it’s you, very glad, very glad to see you,” he said anyhow, smiling and going up to him. But Rostov had noticed his first reaction.
“Nastasya Ivanovna, what will I give birth to?” she asked the buffoon, who came from the opposite direction in his short quilted jacket.
In the middle of the way, Nikolai handed the horses over to the coachman, ran to Natasha’s sleigh for a moment, and stood on the fender.
“It’s the Bonapartists who say that,” said the viscount, not looking at Pierre. “Right now it’s hard to know public opinion in France.”
“Ex-cuse me, sir,” Prince Andrei, with dry unpleasantness, addressed himself in Russian to Prince Ippolit, who was standing in his way.
“Ah, he’s in a terrible state,” the mother said to the son, as they were getting back into the carriage. “He hardly recognizes anyone.”
“She needs rest,” said Prince Andrei, wincing. “Isn’t it so, Liza? Take her to your rooms, and I’ll go to father. How is he, the same?”
“Well, yes, yes,” said the regimental commander, “still one must pity the young fellow in his misfortune. Big connections…So you just…”
“Well, thank God, Princess,” Marya Bogdanovna said, without quickening her pace. “You young girls oughtn’t to know about these things.”
“And it can’t be otherwise?” she asked. Prince Andrei said nothing, but his face expressed the impossibility of changing this decision.
After many hesitations, doubts, and prayers, Princess Marya gave her father the letter. The next day the old prince calmly said to her:
“How beautiful she is!” Natasha said to her father, who stood up along with the others and moved through the crowd towards the actress.
“Fool, the sable one I told you. Hey, Matryoshka, the sable one!” he shouted so loudly that his voice echoed far off through the rooms.
Anna Pavlovna all but closed her eyes as a sign that neither she nor anyone else could judge of the empress’s good pleasure or liking.
He did not say you what,  but his tone already showed how highly he valued his friend and how much he expected from him in the future.
Boris knew nothing about the Boulogne expedition; he did not read the newspapers, and was hearing about Villeneuve for the first time.
“And why didn’t you convince Bonaparte through diplomatic channels that he’d better leave Genoa?” Prince Andrei said in the same tone.
Then came a thin, pale soldier, his neck bandaged with a bloody footcloth, and in an angry voice demanded water from the artillerists.
“He has forty thousand men, if that,” Weyrother replied, with the smile of a doctor being told by a wise woman how to treat a patient.
“The one at the end, the big one, don’t you see? It’s our house,” said Rostov, “it’s our house! Denisov! Denisov! We’re nearly there.”
In the morning, when the valet came into his study bringing coffee, Pierre was lying asleep on the sofa with an open book in his hand.
“Can you imagine! She refused him, refused him altogether!” said Natasha. “She said she loved another,” she added after a brief pause.
A third of the guests had already arrived at the ball, but the Rostovs, who were to be there, were still hurriedly preparing to dress.
The next day Prince Andrei went to the Rostovs’ for dinner, as Count Ilya Andreich had invited him, and spent the whole day with them.
“You do get angry, though, brother,” said the count. Danilo said nothing and just shyly smiled his childishly meek and pleasant smile.
“For God’s sake, what are you…If you tell, you’re my enemy,” Natasha began. “You want me to be unhappy, you want them to separate us…”
“Who’s laughing?” the coachman said with a chuckle. “There’s no sparing horses for my gentlemen. We’ll go as fast as they can gallop.”
“I do,” Prince Andrei said hastily. “I said that a fallen woman should be forgiven, but I did not say that I could forgive. I cannot.”
And, as if to let the Russian general feel still more his dependence on brute force, Davout sent his adjutant for the officer on duty.
Pierre took off his spectacles, which made his face change, expressing still more kindness, and looked at his friend in astonishment.
Natasha, tearing her face momentarily from her mother’s lace wrap, looked up at her through tears of laughter and hid her face again.
“How many times have I asked you not to take my things,” she said. “You have a room of your own.” She took the inkstand from Nikolai.
“If I knew anything would come of it besides humiliation…” her son replied coldly. “But I’ve promised you, and I’m doing it for you.”
“I need a lot, Count, I need five hundred rubles.” And, taking out a cambric handkerchief, she began rubbing her husband’s waistcoat.
But Rostov tore his arm free and, with as much spite as if Denisov was his greatest enemy, directly and firmly fixed his eyes on him.
“Wouldn’t you be a nimble one, Zikin, if they set you on a horse,” a corporal joked to a thin little soldier bent under a heavy pack.
“From General Field Marshal Kutuzov?” he asked. “With good news, I hope? There was an encounter with Mortier? A victory? About time!”
“So Marie doesn’t have to be taken out: suitors are coming to us themselves,” the little princess said indiscreetly on hearing of it.
“So they’re already writing from Potsdam?” he repeated Prince Vassily’s last words, suddenly stood up, and went over to his daughter.
The count was delighted that Anna Mikhailovna was taking on part of his errands, and he ordered the smaller carriage readied for her.
“Well, there—silliness! I’m telling you a real thing,” Natasha said crossly. “I come to ask you what to do, and you say ‘silliness’…”
“Mama, darling, how I love you, how good I feel!” Natasha cried, shedding tears of happiness and excitement and embracing her mother.
“Well, Nastasya Ivanovna,” the count said in a whisper, winking at him, “if you frighten the beast away, Danilo will give it to you.”
“It’s vile, low, inhuman to take advantage of the weakness…” She did not finish. “Get out of my room,” she cried and burst into sobs.
“Love?” Natasha repeated with a smile of regret at her friend’s incomprehension. “Haven’t you read the letter, haven’t you seen him?”
PRINCESS ELIZAV&#201;TA K&#193;RLOVNA, n&#233;e Meinen (L&#237;za, Lizav&#233;ta, Lise), the “little princess,” Prince Andrei’s wife
The Englishman, having produced his purse, counted out the money. Dolokhov frowned and said nothing. Pierre climbed into the window.
The colonel was a tall, stout, and sanguine German, obviously a seasoned soldier and a patriot. He took offense at Shinshin’s words.
“It’s pecause of that, my tear sir,” he concluded didactically, drinking a glass of wine and looking to the count for encouragement.
A powdered old servant who was sitting in the waiting room got up with a quiet movement and in a whisper announced: “If you please.”
Denisov took the lighted pipe served to him, clutched it in his fist, banged it on the floor, spraying sparks, and went on shouting:
“Oooh! Leave me alone, for Christ’s sake,” the wounded man cried; but all the same they lifted him up and laid him on the stretcher.
“Rostov, come here, let’s drink from rief!” shouted Denisov, sitting down by the edge of the road in front of a flask and some food.
“Here it is, the decisive moment has come! Now it’s my turn,” thought Prince Andrei, and, spurring his horse, he rode up to Kutuzov.
“Why did they bring a baby there?” was Prince Andrei’s first thought. “A baby? What baby?…Why is he there? Or has a baby been born?”
Rostov staked five roubles and lost, staked once more and lost again. Dolokhov “killed”—that is, won—ten cards in a row from Rostov.
“I am not petitioning for anything, but the sovereign emperor has deigned to pass on to Your Excellency the memorandum I submitted…”
The princess, smiling and talking with everyone, suddenly effected the transposition, and, taking a seat, cheerily settled herself.
Prince Andrei looked at him with kindly eyes. But in his friendly, gentle gaze a consciousness of his own superiority still showed.
“He has written all sorts of wills,” the princess said calmly, “but he cannot bequeath anything to Pierre! Pierre is illegitimate.”
“I’ll skip two letters and read the third,” the prince said sternly. “I’m afraid you write a lot of nonsense. I’ll read the third.”
The unknown general looked down scornfully at the short Kozlovsky, as if surprised that there could be people who did not know him.
“Your Excellency,” he said in German, stepping forward and addressing the Austrian general, “I have the honor to congratulate you.”
“Don’t touch me,” said Rostov, drawing back. “If you need the money, take it.” He flung the purse at him and ran out of the tavern.
“How do you mean, what the devil is a letter?” said Boris, picking it up and reading the address. “You need this letter very much.”
But most of all, in all circles, they talked about the sovereign Alexander, repeating his every word and movement and admiring him.
It was already late in the evening when they entered the Olm&#252;tz palace, which was occupied by the emperors and their retinues.
“Eh, brother! They all ran off ahead there long ago!” the soldier said to Rostov, laughing at something and trying to free himself.
Prince Andrei was observing these gentlemen grown timid in the sovereign’s presence and ladies faint with the desire to be invited.
“Because I’ve made an observation: a young man usually comes to Moscow from Petersburg only with the aim of marrying a rich bride.”
Dolokhov, with a cold smile and flashing his beautiful, insolent eyes, looked at him, clearly wanting to taunt him a little longer.
“Let me…be…what do I…I’ll…die…” she said, freed herself from Marya Dmitrievna with an angry thrust, and lay in her former position.
History, that is, the unconscious, swarmlike life of mankind, uses every moment of a king’s life as an instrument for its purposes.
“Oh, no, not too early at all!” said the count. “How is it, then, that our mothers got married when they were twelve or thirteen?”
“Well, she’s done it,” Nikolai mixed in, “she’s said unpleasant things to everybody and upset everybody. Let’s go to the nursery.”
“Ah, money, Count, money—there’s so much grief in the world because of it!” said the countess. “But I need this money very badly.”
Anna Mikhailovna instantly realized what it was about and bent forward so as to embrace the countess adroitly at the right moment.
“All the same, seriously speaking,” replied Prince Andrei, “we can still say without boasting that this is a bit better than Ulm…”
What Prince Vassily referred to as “received from Ryazan” was several thousand in quitrent, which Prince Vassily kept for himself.
“I’m asking you when you got a letter from Bolkonsky,” Prince Vassily repeats for the third time. “You’re so distracted, my dear.”
“I’m not talking about you,” he said, “I don’t know you, and, I confess, I don’t wish to. I’m talking about the staff in general.”
“La r&#233;serve, sire!”  someone’s voice replied, so human after the non-human voice that had said: “Les hussards de Pavlograd?”
“Eh, you fool! Pah!” the old man said and spat angrily. Some time passed in silent movement, and the same joke was repeated again.
Sonya, Natasha, Petya, Anna Mikhailovna, Vera, the old count embraced him; servants and maids filled the room, talking and ah-ing.
“Remember, we talked once about gambling…he’s a fool who wants to gamble on luck; gambling needs certainty, but I want to try it.”
“What? To whom?…You’re joking!” the count cried, his neck and nape suddenly turning an apoplectic red, as happens with old people.
“But you don’t know Him, my dear sir,” said the Mason. “You cannot know Him. You don’t know Him, and that is why you are unhappy.”
“My friend,” said Princess Marya, addressing her brother from beside the crib where she was standing, “it’s better to wait…later…”
The uncle’s hunter rode across the wolf’s path from the other side, and his dogs again stopped the beast. He was again surrounded.
Ilyin took a bucket of water and, pouring a drop of rum into it, came to Marya Genrikhovna, asking her to stir it with her finger.
“No, wait, Pierre. The princess is so good that she will not want to deprive me of the pleasure of spending an evening with you.”
“La bont&#233; divine est in&#233;puisable. C’est la c&#233;r&#233;monie de l’extr&#234;me onction qui va commencer. Venez.” ‡134
He said nothing to Pierre, only squeezed his upper arm feelingly. Pierre and Anna Mikhailovna moved on to the small drawing room.
“Comme c’est un homme d’esprit, votre p&#232;re,”  she said, “c’est &#224; cause de cela peut-&#234;tre qu’il me fait peur.” ‡169
“Ah, Timokhin!” said the commander in chief, recognizing the red-nosed captain who had suffered on account of the blue greatcoat.
“Friend of my heart, how are you?” he said to the sounds of the song, adjusting the pace of his horse to the pace of the company.
“Count!…don’t ruin…a young man…here’s this wretched…money, take it…” He threw it on the table. “I have an old father, a mother!…”
“Crew, to your pieces!” the officer commanded, and in a minute the artillery crew ran merrily from their campfires and loaded up.
“La femme est la compagne de l’homme,” *204 uttered Prince Ippolit, and he began examining his raised feet through his lorgnette.
“The wound isn’t here, it’s there!” said Kutuzov, pressing the handkerchief to his wounded cheek and pointing to the fleeing men.
“Ah, no, no!”—and besides the paleness, the face of the little princess showed a childish fear of unavoidable physical suffering.
“Tell the prince that labor has begun,” said Marya Bogdanovna, glancing significantly at the messenger. Tikhon went and told him.
“Papa! Pa…pa!” he cried out after him, sobbing, “forgive me!” And, seizing his father’s hand, he pressed his lips to it and wept.
“Papa, you look so handsome, it’s lovely!” said Natasha, standing in the middle of the room and spreading the folds of the gauze.
“Say what you like,” Sonya cried with despair in her voice, looking at Natasha’s dress, “say what you like, it’s still too long!”
Natasha had not had a free moment since the morning of that day and had never once had time to think about what lay ahead of her.
At that same time, Andrei was sitting with Pierre and telling him of his love for Natasha and of his firm intention to marry her.
“Edward Karlych, please play my favorite Nocturne  by Monsieur Field,”9 the voice of the old countess said from the drawing room.
“No, Countess,” he said finally, “that is a European talent, there’s nothing for her to learn, that softness, tenderness, power…”
Pierre was one of those retired gentlemen-in-waiting of whom there were hundreds good-naturedly living out their lives in Moscow.
Pierre looked at Rastopchin with na&#239;ve astonishment, not understanding why he was disturbed by the poor wording of the note.
She stopped. She needed so much that he say that word which would explain to her what had happened and that she could answer him.
“Si vous vous permettez dans mon salon…” *386 H&#233;l&#232;ne said in a whisper; but Pierre left the room without answering her.
Not letting go of the abb&#233; and Pierre, Anna Pavlovna, the better to keep an eye on them, joined them to the general circle.
“I’m very glad I didn’t go to the ambassador’s,” said Prince Ippolit, “it’s boring…A wonderful evening. Wonderful, isn’t it so?”
“He would like to be turned on that side,” whispered the servant, and he got up to turn the count’s heavy body face to the wall.
He asked, “Whose company?” but essentially he was asking, “You’re not scared here, are you?” And the fireworker understood that.
“Captain Tushin’s, Your Excellency,” the red-haired, freckle-faced fireworker cried out in a merry voice, snapping to attention.
“Very good, very good! We’ll discuss it all,” said Prince Andrei. “Just let me report about this gentleman, and then I’m yours.”
“Lads, to the health of the sovereign emperor, to victory over our foes, hurrah!” he cried in his dashing old hussar’s baritone.
“This evening they were. But now I can’t tell, Your Excellency. Give the order, and I’ll go there with my hussars,” said Rostov.
Valuev told confidentially that Uvarov had been sent from Petersburg to find out the opinion of the Muscovites about Austerlitz.
“And now Dolokhov—sitting on the snow, with a forced smile, maybe dying, and responding to my regret with some sort of swagger!”
The next day the countess, having asked to see Boris, had a talk with him, and from that day on he stopped visiting the Rostovs.
“You’re going?” said Natasha. “I just knew it. Sonya said you wouldn’t. I knew that on a day like this you couldn’t help going.”
The uncle played another song, then a waltz; then, after a pause, he cleared his throat and struck up his favorite hunting song:
“I, too, want to become a Muscovite now,” said H&#233;l&#232;ne. “And you should be ashamed to bury such pearls in the country!”
“It won’t cost you anything to say a word to the sovereign, and he’ll be transferred straight away to the guards,” she pleaded.
He tossed the bottle to the Englishman, who deftly caught it. Dolokhov jumped down from the window. He smelled strongly of rum.
Prince Vassily was seeing the princess off. The princess was holding a handkerchief to her eyes, and her face was all in tears.
Andrei did not tell his father that he would probably live for a long time yet. He understood that there was no need to say it.
“Yes, the Austrian prince who built a castle here was no fool. A fine place. Why aren’t you eating, gentlemen?” said Nesvitsky.
He called the Cossack with the horse, told him to put the bag and flask away, and lightly swung his heavy body into the saddle.
“Bon, je vous laisse dans votre petit coin. Je vois que vous y &#234;tes tr&#232;s bien,” *230 said the voice of Anna Pavlovna.
They all dispersed and, except for Anatole, who fell asleep as soon as he lay down, it was long before anyone slept that night.
“And if I should meet His Majesty before the commander in chief, Your Excellency?” asked Rostov, holding his hand to his visor.
“Well, that you really can’t know,” said Nikolai, “but I must speak with her. What a delight this Sonya is!” he added, smiling.
“Nikolenka, what’s the matter with you?” asked Sonya’s eyes, turned to him. She saw at once that something had happened to him.
“I’ll send someone at once, he’ll be taken away, he’ll be taken away,” the assistant said hastily. “If you please, Your Honor.”
“A petition—go to the officer on duty, this way, please” (he pointed him to the downstairs door). “Only you won’t be received.”
“Member, without salary,” repeated Arakcheev. “My respects. Hey! Call ’em in! Who’s next?” he shouted, bowing to Prince Andrei.
Contrary to his habit of being late, Pierre came to the Bergs’ that day at a quarter to eight, instead of ten minutes to eight.
“Natasha, it’s your turn now! Sing something for me,” said the countess’s voice. “Why are you sitting there like conspirators?”
The countess, sobbing heavily, hid her face on her daughter’s breast, and Nikolai got up, clutched his head, and left the room.
After Nikolai’s departure, the Rostovs’ house became sadder than ever. The countess was so emotionally upset that she fell ill.
After breakfast Marya Dmitrievna (this was her best time) sat down in her armchair and called Natasha and the old count to her.
“Natasha’s not very well. She’s in her room and would like to see you. Marya Dmitrievna is with her and also asks you to come.”
“But Mr. Kuragin did not, then, bestow his hand upon Countess Rostov?” Andrei asked. He snorted through his nose several times.
Davout looked at him silently, and the slight trouble and confusion expressed on Balashov’s face clearly afforded him pleasure.
“That’s all rubbish,” Prince Andrei stopped him again, “better let’s talk about business. Have you been to the horse guards?…”
“You, my dear countess, are a notorious spendthrift,” said the count, and, kissing his wife’s hand, he went back to his study.
“Well,” he said, turning to his wife, and this “well” sounded like cold mockery, as if he had said: “Now perform your tricks.”
“Adieu, Marie,”  he said softly to his sister, they kissed each other’s hands, and with quick steps he walked out of the room.
“Because once you’ve set out on a career in military service, you should try to do all you can to make it a brilliant career.”
“Maybe him, or maybe just so,” the hussar said, “a night thing. Easy, now!” he cried to his horse, who was stirring under him.
“To the commission on military regulations, and I have proposed that Your Honor be enrolled as a member. Only without salary.”
He glanced at her again, and this glance convinced her that she was not mistaken. Yes, her fate was decided, now, this minute.
“What, teasing again? Go to hell! Eh?…” Anatole said, wincing. “I can’t keep on with your stupid jokes.” And he left the room.
Natasha, for the first time in many days, wept tears of gratitude and tenderness and, after glancing at Pierre, left the room.
“Home,” said Pierre, throwing open the bearskin coat on his broad, joyfully breathing chest, despite the ten degrees of frost.
COUNT NIKOL&#193;I ILY&#205;CH (Nik&#243;lushka, Nik&#243;lenka, Nikol&#225;shka, K&#243;lya, Nicolas, Coco), their elder son
“All heart, in a word!…” the subaltern officer said, laughing (the regimental commander’s nickname was “the King of Hearts”).
They rode to the opposite hill. From this hill they could already see the French. Prince Andrei stopped and began to examine.
“Splendid!” he cried. “He’ll get you and your dowry and incidentally take along Mlle Bourienne. She’ll be his wife, and you…”
“Gently, gently, can’t you do it gently?” said the sovereign, clearly suffering more than the dying soldier, and he rode off.
“Papa, he’s a blackguard and a thief, I know it. What’s done is done. But if you don’t want it, I won’t say anything to him.”
“No, it’s a chorus from The Water-Carrier, 8 don’t you hear?” And Natasha finished singing the chorus to give Sonya the idea.
Anatole came into the room again and, trying to focus his attention, looked at Dolokhov, obviously obeying him involuntarily.
Pierre swung his whole body so that the sofa creaked, turned his animated face to Prince Andrei, smiled, and waved his hand.
“Mon ami!”  the mother said in a pleading voice, again touching her son’s hand as if this touch could calm or encourage him.
Mitenka, that nobleman’s son, brought up by the count, who now managed all his affairs, came into the room with quiet steps.
“Yes,” the lackey answered in a bold, loud voice, as though everything was permitted now, “the door on the left, good lady.”
The lieutenant never looked the person he was talking to in the eye; his eyes constantly shifted from one object to another.
“Where are you going?” asked an infantry officer, eating an apple, also with a half smile and looking at the beautiful girl.
In a most modest way, not once mentioning himself, Bolkonsky told about the action and his reception by the minister of war.
Prince Bagration and Tushin now looked with the same intentness at Bolkonsky, who was speaking with restraint and agitation.
Anna Pavlovna gave him her dry hand to kiss, introduced him to some strangers, and whispered her definitions of them to him.
“But what are you shouting for? Calm down,” said Rostov. “Here you’re bleeding again. Wait, your bandage should be changed.”
“Yes,” said Prince Andrei, “my father didn’t want me to take advantage of that right; I started service in the lower ranks.”
“No, listen,” said Prince Andrei, stopping him by the arm. “Can you know what state I’m in? I must tell it all to somebody.”
In the middle of a sedate conversation about that year’s harvest, begun by Ilagin, Nikolai pointed to his red-spotted bitch.
Everyone fell silent: about this fact, which referred personally to the sovereign, it was impossible to express any opinion.
Natasha, motionless and breathless, with shining eyes, watched from behind her ambush. “What will happen now?” she thought.
“It’s your prot&#233;g&#233;e, your dear Anna Mikhailovna, whom I wouldn’t have as a housemaid—that vile, loathsome woman.”
“Every man has his Achilles’ heel,” Prince Andrei went on. “With his  enormous intelligence, donner dans ce ridicule! ”*165
Kutuzov sighed deeply as he finished this paragraph and looked at the member of the Hofkriegsrath attentively and benignly.
“Not only occupied, but Bonaparte is in Sch&#246;nbrunn, and the count, our dear Count Vrbna, is going to him for orders.”9
“Laissez-moi, laissez-moi, tout &#231;a m’est parfaitement &#233;gal,” #245 answered a voice barely holding back its tears.
Having stopped facing the Pavlogradsky regiment, the sovereign said something in French to the Austrian emperor and smiled.
Only as he approached Bagration, Rostov sent his horse into a gallop again and, with his hand to his visor, rode up to him.
“Vassily Denisov, friend of your son,” he said, introducing himself to the old count, who was looking at him questioningly.
“I don’t take back my word in anything,” he said. “And besides, Sonya is so lovely—what fool would renounce his happiness?”
“Why, Your Excellency, all they want is to eat well, but putting it all together and serving it is none of their business.”
“Oh, no!” Iogel hastened to reassure him. “You were merely inattentive, but you had the ability, yes, you had the ability.”
Pierre already felt in himself that refreshing source of blessedness which now filled his soul with joy and tender feeling.
“C’est l’&#233;p&#233;e de Fr&#233;d&#233;ric le Grand que je…” *303 she began, but Ippolit interrupted her with the words:
“I’ve come on my own, my provider,” Ivanushka said, trying to speak in a bass voice. “I met Pelageyushka only in Yukhnovo.”
“All right, all right,” the officer said menacingly, and, turning his horse, he rode off at a trot, bouncing in the saddle.
The entire suite now drew back, and Rostov saw the general speak about something with the sovereign for a rather long time.
“Here I’ve got Pryanichnikov serving under me, a nice man, good as gold, but he’s sixty—is he going to take examinations?…”
The uncle glanced disapprovingly at Petya and Natasha. He did not like combining play with the serious business of hunting.
“I know, you must have been thinking about him, ” said Nikolai, smiling, as Natasha could tell from the sound of his voice.
“Only when will it all be? Never, I’m afraid…It would be too good!” said Natasha, getting up and going over to the mirrors.
The countess stayed in the country, and the count, taking Sonya and Natasha with him, went to Moscow at the end of January.
“Do you recognize him?” he asked. “But where has he appeared from?” the count asked Shinshin. “Didn’t he vanish somewhere?”
And she spread her arms to show her elegant gray, lace-trimmed dress, tied slightly below the breasts with a broad ribbon.
The prince apparently realized, as at Annette Scherer’s soir&#233;e, that it was difficult to get rid of Anna Mikhailovna.
“Really! Swear to God!” replied Natasha, straightening a strand of stiff hair that had come loose from her friend’s braid.
“Remember that you will answer for all the consequences,” Prince Vassily said sternly. “You don’t know what you’re doing.”
“We were ordered to be in place before nine, but we’re not halfway there. What orders!” was repeated from different sides.
“Look, look,” said this adjutant, looking not at the distant troops, but down the hill in front of him. “It’s the French!”
“But that’s the grand duke, and I need the commander in chief or the sovereign,” said Rostov, and he touched up his horse.
Her eyes were smiling in expectation, her little lip with its mustache rose and remained raised in a childishly happy way.
“Don’t say that to me. I don’t want anything. I love you as a brother, and will love you always, and I need nothing more.”
“But how can you live for yourself alone?” asked Pierre, becoming heated. “What about your son, your sister, your father?”
The next day, having taken leave of the count alone, without waiting for the ladies to come out, Prince Andrei drove home.
“Mon cher,”  Princess Marya would say, coming in at such a moment, “Nikolushka musn’t go for a walk today: it’s too cold.”
“Ah, so it’s you, Prince, who freed your muzhiks?” asked an old man of Catherine’s time, glancing scornfully at Bolkonsky.
At a quarter past ten they finally got into carriages and drove off. But they still had to stop by the Tavrichesky Garden.
“No, fortune-telling in the bathhouse, that’s the scary thing!” an old maid who lived with the Melyukovs said over supper.
“Yes. Wait…I…saw him,” Sonya said involuntarily, still not knowing who Natasha meant by him: him  Nikolai, or him  Andrei.
The bare H&#233;l&#232;ne sat next to her and smiled identically at everyone; and Natasha smiled at Boris in the same way.
Accustomed though Balashov was to court solemnity, the luxury and magnificence of the emperor Napoleon’s court struck him.
“He’s in his sixties! Well, so they say the count no longer recognizes anyone? Do they mean to give him extreme unction?”
“Well, my friend, I’m afraid you and this monk are wasting your powder,” Prince Andrei said mockingly but affectionately.
“I tell you, there’ll be a purse,” Denisov shouted, shaking the orderly by the shoulder and pushing him against the wall.
He looked intently and questioningly into his friend’s eyes, evidently searching in vain for the answer to some question.
The sovereign said something more which Rostov did not hear, and the soldiers, straining their chests, shouted: “Hurrah!”
Late that night, when everyone had dispersed, Denisov, with his short hand, patted his favorite, Rostov, on the shoulder.
“Vassily Dmitrich, I’m so sorry for you!…No, but you’re so nice…but you mustn’t…that…but I’ll always love you like this.”
“You mean you don’t understand? Nikolenka would understand…Bezukhov—he’s blue, dark blue with red, and he’s rectangular.”
“Will you hurry up, finally?” the count said, coming through the door. “Here’s your scent. Mme Peronsky must be waiting.”
The princess was about to make some objection, but her father did not let her, and began raising his voice more and more.
“I asked papa and mama about that blackamoor,” said Natasha. “They say there wasn’t any blackamoor. But you do remember!”
“Did you hear about the latest event at the review in Petersburg? What a show the new French ambassador made of himself!”
Pierre met the old count. He was embarrassed and upset. That morning Natasha had told him that she had refused Bolkonsky.
“Let him be,” Marya Genrikhovna said with a timid and happy smile, “he’s sleeping well as it is after a sleepless night.”
The prince did not reply, but she fell silent, looking at him significantly, waiting for a reply. Prince Vassily winced.
“Another Izmail comrade,”2 he said. “A brave officer! Are you pleased with him?” Kutuzov asked the regimental commander.
Rostov shrugged his shoulders, as if to say, “So do I, but what to do!” and, having given orders, went back to Telyanin.
On the evening of the same day, an animated conversation was going on among the squadron officers in Denisov’s quarters.
“Good-bye, thank you very much. The sovereign emperor will probably wish to see you,” he repeated and inclined his head.
“Well, good-bye, Bolkonsky! Good-bye, Prince; come early to dinner,” said several voices. “We’ll take good care of you.”
“Couldn’t see a thing. What a roasting they gave their own! Couldn’t see, it’s so dark, brother. Got anything to drink?”
The sovereign turned with a smile to one of his retinue, pointing to the gallant Apsherontsy, and said something to him.
“Turn off!” he cried, skipping over the ice, which cracked under him; “turn off!” he cried to the ordnance. “It holds!…”
“There are so many prisoners today, almost the whole Russian army, that he must be bored with it,” said another officer.
Knowing that Denisov was famous even in Poland for his skill in dancing the Polish mazurka, Nikolai ran over to Natasha.
The servant brought back his empty, overturned glass and a bitten lump of sugar,2 and asked whether anything was needed.
Pierre blushed and, hastily lowering his legs from the bed, leaned towards the old man, smiling unnaturally and timidly.
“Well, that’s just it! You know there’s a there  and there’s a someone? There  is the future life. The someone  is—God.”
“You’ll answer for this, Captain, it’s violence—to seize your own army’s transport! Our men haven’t eaten for two days!”
“March off to the devil, quick step, while you’re still in one piece.” And Denisov turned his horse towards the officer.
“Bien faite et la beaut&#233; du diable,” *330 this man was saying, and, seeing Rostov, he stopped speaking and frowned.
“I can’t help loving the light, it’s not my fault. And I’m very happy. Do you understand me? I know you’re glad for me.”
The victorious hunter rode into the crowd of hunters and there, surrounded by curious sympathizers, told of his exploit.
“Oh?” the uncle said with surprise, looking questioningly at Natasha. Natasha, with a happy smile, nodded affirmatively.
H&#233;l&#232;ne came out to the drawing room again together with Natasha. Without staying for supper, the Rostovs left.
On Friday the Rostovs were to go to the country, and on Wednesday the count went with a buyer to his estate near Moscow.
He glanced at Balashov with pity, and just as Balashov was about to observe something, he again hastily interrupted him.
At the sight of the letter, the princess’s face became covered with red blotches. She hastily took it and bent over it.
“Well, why are you silent? Who have you got there dressed up like a Hungarian?” the regimental commander joked sternly.
Dolokhov slowly straightened his bent leg and looked the general directly in the face with his light and insolent gaze.
“Why, he’s really a good man, you can serve with him,” Timokhin said to a subaltern officer who was walking beside him.
He bowed his head and began scraping with one foot, then the other, awkwardly, like children who are learning to dance.
The German laughed, came all the way out of the cowshed door, pulled off his cap, and, waving it above his head, cried:
“Two days ago on the Danube,” a soldier replied. Prince Andrei took out a purse and gave the soldier three gold pieces.
“I’ll flatten you like a pancake—turn back!” the officer shouted angrily at the soldier. “Turn back with your trollop!”
“When did you get it? From Olm&#252;tz?” Prince Vassily repeats, as if he needs to know in order to settle an argument.
The prince stopped. He noticed the impression these words made on his daughter. She hung her head and was about to cry.
“Ah, for pity’s sake, Count, I understand very well,” said Berg, getting up and speaking to himelf in a guttural voice.
“But there’s a difference between not acknowledging him as emperor and calling him General Buonaparte,” said Bolkonsky.
“Where is the sovereign? Where is Kutuzov?” Rostov asked everyone he could stop, and he got no answer from any of them.
“Is this your saber?” asked Petya. “Or is it yours?” he turned to the mustached, black Denisov with obsequious respect.
“Would you like to have the suitcases brought in? Would you like to have the bed made, or tea served?” asked his valet.
Pierre felt embarrassed and wanted to avoid that gaze, but the old man’s glittering eyes drew him irresistibly to them.
“Mon prince, je parle de l’empereur Napol&#233;on,” ‡328 he replied. The general smiled and patted him on the shoulder.
“Ah, my God! my God! what on earth is it!” she suddenly cried. “If it’s sleep, it’s sleep!” and she slammed the window.
“He wasn’t always an old man. But I tell you what, Natasha, I’ll have a talk with Borya. He oughtn’t to come so often…”
“Well, that’s stupid. Eh?” said Anatole, feeling a button of his collar, which had been ripped out with a bit of cloth.
“Well, but in truth, Marie, I wonder if father’s character isn’t sometimes hard on you?” Prince Andrei asked suddenly.
“Where the devil did you stuff those foot cloths?” said an orderly, running behind the cart and rummaging in the back.
“Colonel,” the officer of the suite interrupted, “you must hurry, otherwise the enemy will move up his canister guns.”
He went on in the same way, in French, pronouncing in Russian only those words he wanted to underscore contemptuously.
“Yes, all that happened!…” he said, smiling happily to himself like a child, and he fell into a sound, youthful sleep.
“And I beg you not to interfieren in vat is not your business,” the colonel replied hotly. “If you vere a cavalryman…”
“Another superior just came, and he turned tail quickly,” the fireworker said to Prince Andrei, “not like Your Honor.”
After this soldier, four soldiers carrying something heavy on a greatcoat passed by the campfire. One of them tripped.
“Yes or no, yes or no, yes or no!” he went on shouting, once the princess, reeling as if in a fog, had left his study.
“Clearly they have not all left, Prince,” said Bagration. “Till tomorrow morning, tomorrow we’ll find out everything.”
Dolokhov himself, during his convalescence, often spoke such words to Rostov as he could never have expected from him.
“All right, then!” shouted the little officer, not intimidated and not going away. “This is highway robbery, so I’ll…”
“That’s exactly the same as Princess Yusupov wore,” said Berg with a happy and kindly smile, pointing to the pelerine.
This letter made an impression on Nikolai. He had that common sense of mediocrity which told him what he ought  to do.
“I don’t think so,” he said, “although—yes. She doesn’t deign to be intelligent…Ah, no, she’s enchanting, that’s all.”
“Wait, Sonya, you’ll understand everything. You’ll see what a man he is. Only don’t think ill either of me or of him.”
“He’s here now, tell him…to for…forgive me.” She stopped and began to breathe still more rapidly, but she did not cry.
“So you don’t consider the emperor Alexander the instigator?” he said unexpectedly with a good-naturedly stupid smile.
“And the prisoners he killed in Africa?”19 said the little princess. “It’s terrible!” And she shrugged her shoulders.
“I still haven’t understood de quoi vous avez peur, ”*74 Prince Andrei said slowly, not taking his eyes off his wife.
“You know, that fat Pierre, who sat across from me, is so funny!” Natasha said suddenly, stopping. “I feel so merry!”
“Ah, rot! Well, what are you standing there for, scarecrow, off to the sergeant major,” Denisov shouted at Lavrushka.
The head of the column was already down in the hollow. The confrontation was to take place on this side of the slope…
“Yes, everything’s different nowadays, everything’s the new way. A fine lad, though! A fine lad! Well, come with me.”
“Don’t come in,” she said to the old count, who was following her, “later,” she said, and closed the door behind her.
The same happy, rapturous faces turned to Denisov’s shaggy little figure with its black mustaches and surrounded him.
“Ma bonne amie, je crains que le fruschtique  (comme dit  Foka, the cook) de ce matin ne m’aie pas fait du mal.” *282
“Marya Bogdanovna! It seems it’s begun,” said Princess Marya, looking at the midwife with frightened, wide-open eyes.
“Well, all right, all right,” cried Denisov, “now there’s no getting out of it, you owe us a barcarolle,  I beg you.”
“I took it from the infantry, took the whole transport by force!” he said. “What, should people drop dead of hunger?”
“I am not…petitioning for anything, Your Excellency,” Prince Andrei said softly. Arakcheev’s eyes turned towards him.
“Just so, just so,” the countess repeated and, shaking all over, she laughed a kindly, unexpected, old woman’s laugh.
“That’s what it means to know how to make acquaintances,” thought Berg, “that’s what it means to know how to behave!”
“Mama, Bolkonsky’s here!” she said. “Mama, it’s terrible, it’s unbearable! I don’t want…to suffer! What am I to do?…”
“Now, Sofya Alexandrovna’s sure to see something,” Dunyasha said in a whisper, “because you just laugh all the time.”
“Do introduce me to your lovely daughters,” she said. “The whole town is shouting about them, and I don’t know them.”
“Revolution and regicide a great thing?…After that…wouldn’t you like to move to that table?” Anna Pavlovna repeated.
“What a pity you weren’t at the Arkharovs’ on Thursday. I was bored without you,” she said, smiling tenderly at him.
“Ah, how nice!” thought Natasha, and when Sonya and Nikolai left the room, she went out after them and called Boris.
“Thirteen, fourteen, fifteen, sixteen…” she said, counting on her thin little fingers. “All right! So it’s settled?”
“What can you do? She’s beautiful! I’ll do everything. You can rest easy,” he said brusquely while sealing a letter.
He cautiously withdrew the shoulder she was lying on, looked into her face, and carefully seated her in an armchair.
Staff Captain Kirsten had twice been broken to the ranks for affairs of honor and had twice won back his commission.
Having looked through the dispatch, he put it on the table and glanced at Prince Andrei, clearly weighing something.
He embraced his daughter, then Pierre again, and kissed him with his old man’s mouth. Tears actually wet his cheeks.
“But how is that?…” said Prince Andrei, who had already been waiting a long time for a chance to express his doubts.
“So you won’t go on? And I had a nice card ready.” As if he was most interested in the amusement of the game itself.
“Countess…” said Denisov, with lowered eyes and a guilty look, and he was about to say something more, but faltered.
“Devil take you and your Karl Ivanych!” He picked up the glass with the drops of medicine in it and went back again.
“How easy it is, how little effort it takes, to do so much good,” thought Pierre, “and how little we care about it!”
“Well, tell me, tell me,” said the boy. Prince Andrei did not answer him, took him off his knees, and left the room.
“Wouldn’t you like to move to that table?” asked Anna Pavlovna. But Pierre, not answering, went on with his speech.
“What do the doctors say?” the princess asked after a brief pause and again showing great sorrow on her weepy face.
“Who was that? The commander in chief himself?” someone asked at the other end of the room. “What a youthful man!…”
“Oh!” Prince Vassily said with reproach and astonishment. He got up. “C’est ridicule. Voyons,  let go, I tell you.”
Anna Pavlovna Scherer, like the others, manifested to Pierre the change that had occurred in society’s view of him.
“Charmant,”  said Bolkonsky. “But the thing is, Prince, that I’ve come to solicit you for this young man. You see…”
“Why should I envy them, mine won’t go away, and now maybe I’ll see the sovereign!” thought Rostov, and he rode on.
Denisov was taken to the room prepared for him, and all the Rostovs gathered in the sitting room around Nikolushka.
“Non, mon cher, je ferai tapisserie,” †290 said Denisov. “Don’t you remember what poor use I made of your lessons?”
“Well, now,” said his father, who was in an especially cheerful mood. “I told you it wouldn’t be enough. How much?”
Hearing his son’s words, Count Ilya Andreich lowered his eyes and began fussing about, as if looking for something.
“Think what you will…She’s like a sister to me, and I can’t describe to you how hurt I felt…because…well, since I…”
“And here she is, the queen of Petersburg, Countess Bezukhov,” she said, pointing to the entering H&#233;l&#232;ne.
Natasha listened with concentrated attention, trying to understand the meaning of his words, and not understanding.
“You go ahead, Zakhar!” Nikolai cried to his father’s coachman, so as to have the chance to outrun him on the road.
On Sunday morning, Marya Dmitrievna invited her guests to the liturgy at her parish of the Dormition on Mogiltsy.12
Dolokhov remained by the gate. Anatole followed the maid into the yard, turned the corner, and ran up to the porch.
“Capital!” Prince Ippolit said in English and began slapping his knee with his palm. The viscount merely shrugged.
A tall, stout, proud-looking lady and her round-faced, smiling daughter came into the room, rustling their skirts.
The little cat fixed her eyes on him and seemed ready at any instant to begin playing and show all her cat nature.
“So-o-onya! One word! How can you torment me and yourself so because of a fantasy?” said Nikolai, taking her hand.
“Dere hass been no occasion,” a German doctor said to an adjutant, “dat one remains alife after a second shtroke.”
Denisov smiled, took from his pouch a handkerchief that gave off a smell of scent, and put it to Nesvitsky’s nose.
But Dolokhov did not go away; he untied the handkerchief, pulled it off, and showed the clotted blood on his head.
The next day the French did not renew the attack, and the remnant of Bagration’s detachment joined Kutuzov’s army.
When Prince Vassily came into the drawing room, the princess was talking softly with an elderly lady about Pierre.
“Prince, what I said is all that is in my heart. I thank you for the honor, but I shall never be your son’s wife.”
Rostov saw the tears that filled the sovereign’s eyes, and heard him say in French to Czartoryski, as he rode off:
“Tomorrow our squadron is assigned to the reserves. Allow me to request that you attach me to the first squadron.”
“Ah! he’s alive,” said Napoleon. “Lift up this young man, ce jeune homme,  and take him to the first-aid station!”
“We must stop here. The emperor will ride by now; it will give him pleasure to see all these gentlemen prisoners.”
The midwife was already coming to meet her, with a significantly calm face, rubbing her small, plump, white hands.
“You are unhappy, my dear sir,” he went on. “You are young, I am old. I should like to help you as much as I can.”
“Go!” the menacing voice said once more. And Prince Vassily was forced to leave without receiving any explanation.
The young count, breathless, paying no attention to them, walked by with resolute strides and went into the house.
“You already got caught once over a petite fille, ” said Dolokhov, who knew about Anatole’s marriage. “Watch out.”
Anatole lay on the sofa in the study, propped on his elbows, smiling pensively and whispering tenderly to himself.
“Et vous disiez, que les dames russes ne valaient pas les dames fran&#231;aises. Il faut savoir s’y prendre.” ‡70
“Do you or do you not know where the will is?” Prince Vassily asked, his cheeks twitching still more than before.
“Loathsome woman!” the princess cried, suddenly falling upon Anna Mikhailovna and tearing the portfolio from her.
“For tomorrow!” he said, quickly finding the page and marking it paragraph by paragraph with his hard fingernail.
“Sickness or no sickness, he’d better not show his face to me—I’ll kill him!” Denisov shouted out bloodthirstily.
A regimental adjutant came in and confirmed the news brought by Zherkov. The orders were to set out the next day.
“My noble word of honor,” said Natasha, crossing herself, “I won’t tell anyone”—and she immediately ran to Sonya.
After the review, there was greater assurance of victory than there might have been after two victorious battles.
“Why no, not in the least,” said Boris. “But if you’re tired, let’s go to my room, and you can lie down to rest.”
“No, I’m perfect, perfect. I feel so good,” Natasha said, even with perplexity. They were silent for a long time.
The night was dark and damp. The horses could not be seen; they only heard them splashing through the unseen mud.
“If only some fool would marry her!” He slammed the door, summoned Mlle Bourienne, and quieted down in his study.
They all fell silent. The old prince looked at Rastopchin with a smile on his face, shaking his head approvingly.
A minute later the marshal’s adjutant, M. de Castries, came in and led Balashov to the lodgings prepared for him.
“I hope to see you again, but I also hope that you will change your opinions, my dear M’sieur Pierre,” she said.
“Wait, he’s not drunk. Give me a bottle,” said Anatole, and taking a glass from the table, he went up to Pierre.
Pierre looked at her questioningly. She kissed the young man on the forehead, wetting it with tears. She paused.
Prince Andrei was silent, but the princess noticed the ironic and scornful expression that appeared on his face.
But the supply soldier, paying no heed the denomination of general, shouted at the soldiers who blocked his way:
“You know what, my dear,” said Bilibin, coming into his room, “I’ve been thinking about you. Why should you go?”
“Second line…Have you written that?” he went on dictating to the scribe. “The Kievsky grenadiers, the Podolsky…”
“Captain, for God’s sake, I’ve bruised my arm,” he said timidly. “For God’s sake, I can’t walk. For God’s sake!”
The prince inclined his head and went up to the porch. “Thank God,” thought the steward, “the cloud has passed!”
Anna Mikhailovna briefly recounted to Natasha the contents of the letter, on condition that she not tell anyone.
“You’re an angel, I’m not worthy of you, only I’m afraid to deceive you.” And Nikolai kissed her hand once more.
“If it’s true that Monsieur Denisov has proposed to you, ridiculous as it is, tell him he’s a fool, that’s all.”
Prince Andrei, leaning his elbow on the rail, looked silently down the floodwaters sparkling in the setting sun.
From behind the shed came the shouting of Denisov again, moving away, and the words: “Saddle up—second section!”
“Lazarev!” the colonel commanded, frowning, and Lazarev, the first soldier in the rank, briskly stepped forward.
“By God, miss, it’s not too long at all,” said Mavrusha, who was crawling on the floor following her young lady.
The countess began to calm Natasha. Natasha first listened to her mother’s words, then suddenly interrupted her:
“Oh, what a big old seasoned one!” he said. “A seasoned one, eh?” he asked Danilo, who was standing next to him.
“Mama!” she said. “Give him  to me, mama, quickly, quickly,” and she again had difficulty holding back her sobs.
“We’re off!” he cried, winding the reins around his hand, and the troika raced thudding down Nikitsky Boulevard.
“What do you mean, get married!” said Pierre to Marya Dmitrievna’s words. “He can’t get married: he is married.”
“I deeply regret her illness,” said Prince Andrei. He grinned coldly, spitefully, unpleasantly, like his father.
…thought Prince Andrei, waiting among many significant and insigificant persons in Count Arakcheev’s anteroom.
“I believe you also wanted to go, maman ? Do you need a carriage?” he said, turning to his mother with a smile.
“You’re so funny!” he said, bending down to her, blushing still more, but not undertaking anything and waiting.
“Yes, it seems he’s unwell. They keep disturbing him,” Pierre replied, trying to recall who this young man was.
“E-eh! my gallant! come here to me!” she said in a falsely quiet and high voice. “Come here to me, my gallant…”
“And he was such a fresh man!” said the adjutant. “And to whom will all that wealth go?” he added in a whisper.
“Well, and so, my dear?” said Prince Vassily, taking the princess’s hand and pulling it down, as was his habit.
“Maybe the count didn’t send for me,” said Pierre, when he came to the landing. “I’ll just go to my own rooms.”
“Right, Your Excellency,” said Timokhin, his smile letting it be felt that he understood his superior’s wishes.
They went out to the porch and to the stable. The lieutenant showed him how to do a clinch nail, and went home.
The hussars ran up to the handlers, the voices became louder and calmer, the stretchers disappeared from sight.
“So I’d have let them take the lead. But no, they huddle in the rear. And now we stand here on empty stomachs.”
The first words he heard when he came to were the words of the French convoy officer, who was saying hurriedly:
For marriage he needed his father’s consent, and for that Prince Andrei set off the next day to see his father.
“Did maman  tell you that it can’t be sooner than in a year?” Prince Andrei asked, still looking into her eyes.
Pierre took the letter he handed him and, pushing aside the table that stood in his way, dropped onto the sofa.
“Here are her letters,” he said, “and her portrait.” He took the bundle from the table and handed it to Pierre.
Avoir l’oreille tir&#233;e par l’Empereur *414 was considered the greatest honor and favor at the French court.
“Bonsoir, Lise,” *76 said Prince Andrei, standing up and kissing her hand politely, as if she were a stranger.
Pierre took hold of the crosspieces, pulled, and, with a crash, here broke and there ripped out the oak frame.
“And what secrets can there be at your age between Natasha and Boris and between you two? It’s all silliness!”
“The same. And, like it or not, this noise…” said the princess, looking Anna Mikhailovna over like a stranger.
He went out, and the ringing, though not loud, laughter of the sister with the mole could be heard behind him.
“Count Rostov invites you to dinner today,” he said after a rather long silence, which was awkward for Pierre.
“Ah, what a Daniel Cooper!” said Marya Dmitrievna, letting out a long, deep breath and pushing up her sleeves.
“You can read this one, mon p&#232;re, ” the princess replied, blushing still more and handing him the letter.
Liza’s little lip lowered. She brought her face close to her sister-in-law’s face and again wept unexpectedly.
Prince Andrei smiled, looking at his sister, as we smile listening to people whom we think we can see through.
The eyes of the general and the soldier met. The general said nothing, angrily pulling down on his tight sash.
“We all have our weaknesses,” said Kutuzov, smiling and moving away from him. “His was a devotion to Bacchus.”
“Quicken the trot,” came the command, and Rostov felt his Little Rook kick up his rump, switching to a canter.
“What orders, Your Honor?” asked the fireworker, who was standing close to him and heard him mutter something.
Tushin ordered them to give him water. Then a merry soldier ran up, asking for a little fire for the infantry.
“The general wants you, Your Honor. He’s staying in a cottage here,” said the fireworker, coming up to Tushin.
“Slightly wounded, but promoted to officer; he’s recovered now, he wrote himself,” she said through her tears.
“Go that way, Your Honor, here you’ll get killed straight off,” a soldier cried to him. “Killed straight off!”
“Good sir, good sir, it’s a sin, a sin. You have a son!” she began, her pallor suddenly turning to bright red.
Saddle horses stood by this house, and the suite was gathering, evidently preparing for the sovereign’s levee.
“But no one has, so what do you want? It’s a circulus viciosus  which we must make an effort to break out of.”
Nikolai gave his horses free rein; Zakhar, stretching his arms forward, clucked his tongue and let his own go.
“And how does he look at the matter now?” asked Pierre, meaning the old prince. Princess Marya shook her head.
“That’s the veritable truth,” he said. “And I regret that I went to see him and took her,” said the old count.
“Ah, you don’t understand anything, don’t say stupid things, just listen,” Natasha said with instant vexation.
BOURI&#201;NNE, AM&#193;LIA EVG&#201;NIEVNA (Am&#233;lie, Bourri&#233;nka), Princess Marya’s French companion
“Madame, je crains pour mes moyens devant un pareil auditoire,” †37 he said, inclining his head with a smile.
The princess smiled as people smile who think they know more about a matter than those they are talking with.
“Pierre, come here, my friend. I think he won’t be out of place in the family council—isn’t that so, Prince?”
“Andr&#233;, d&#233;j&#224;?” *177 the little princess said, turning pale and looking at her husband in fear.
Rostov took the money and, mechanically sorting the old and new coins into separate piles, began counting it.
Rostov, avoiding Denisov’s eyes, began to button his jacket, buckled on his saber, and put on his peaked cap.
Denisov still kept silent and did not stir, glancing at Rostov from time to time with his shining black eyes.
“That’s the way, Count!” the staff captain cried, turning and slapping him on the shoulder with his big hand.
“Don’t raise dust, you footsloggers!” joked a hussar, whose horse, prancing, splashed mud at the infantryman.
“You spoke to me about flammable material,” he said, “but you said nothing to me about setting feuer  to it.”
But before Prince Andrei finished, an adjutant came into the room to summon Prince Dolgorukov to the emperor.
“Anyhow, there’ll be a council of war at Kutuzov’s today: you can speak all this out there,” said Dolgorukov.
“Yes, yes, please, or it will get late,” he said, and, nodding his head, lowered it and again closed his eye.
Dolgorukov was still insisting on his opinion that the French had retreated and lit fires only to deceive us.
“Countess Natasha,” replied Denisov. “And how well she dances, what race!” he said again, after some silence.
“It’s all the same to me,” he said. “I’m just curious to know whether you’ll kill this ten or let me win it.”
“But I have nothing with me,” said Pierre, thinking that he was being asked to hand over everything he owned.
At the end of her letter she informed him that in a few days she would be arriving in Petersburg from abroad.
Natasha told him about her romance with Prince Andrei, his visit to Otradnoe, and showed him his last letter.
After several recitations, Mlle George left, and Countess Bezukhov invited the company to the reception room.
“He gives you the simple, and beats it with the paroli; gives you the simple, and beats it with the paroli.”
“Well, come on then. I only stopped to ask Denisov about yesterday’s orders. Did you receive them, Denisov?”
But before he finished, he felt that his joke was unsuccessful and had not gone over. He became embarrassed.
“You forget yourself, Colonel. I am not concerned with my own pleasure, and I will not allow you to say so.”
“Of course, we nearly ran into each other,” said the staff officer on duty, smiling pleasantly at Bolkonsky.
“Mon bon ami?”  Anna Mikhailovna uttered with questioning sadness and a readiness for all sorts of sympathy.
“A letter from Nikolenka? Surely!” cried Natasha, reading the affirmative answer in Anna Mikhailovna’s face.
But at that moment Miloradovich was obviously thinking least of all of what the generals were arguing about.
“But you’d better not gamble,” Dolokhov added, and, flexing a newly opened deck, he said: “Bank, gentlemen!”
“It’s highway robbery, my dear sir, you’ll answer for it!” the infantry officer repeated, raising his voice.
“Stop it, mama, I’m not thinking and I don’t want to think! So he came, and then stopped, and then stopped…”
Princess Marya sighed, and the expression of her face said: “Yes, that’s what I expected and was afraid of.”
“Drubetskoy’s made a proposal! Yes, indeed, I found out today,” said Shinshin, coming into the Rostovs’ box.
“No, wait,” said Anatole. “Close the door, we have to sit down.15 There.” They closed the door and sat down.
“Your emperor’s orders are carried out in your army, but here,” said Davout, “you should do as you’re told.”
“Are the horses ready for the general?” he added, inclining his head slightly in response to Balashov’s bow.
Pierre looked at Prince Andrei and, noticing that his friend did not like this conversation, made no reply.
“Que voulez-vous, mon cher,”  said Pierre, shrugging his shoulders, “les femmes, mon cher, les femmes!” ‡81
He shrugged his shoulders. The servant led the young man down and up another stairway to Pyotr Kirillovich.
She paused. Everyone fell silent, waiting for what would happen and feeling that this was only the preface.
And the conversation again became concentrated, the ladies’ at their end of the table, the men’s at theirs.
Telyanin was sitting in the same indolent pose in which Rostov had left him, rubbing his small white hands.
“Denisov, leave him alone; I know who took it,” said Rostov, approaching the door and not raising his eyes.
He pointed to the convent with its towers, visible on the hilltop. He smiled, his eyes narrowed and lit up.
“Look at ’em, it’s like a dam burst,” the Cossack said, stopping hopelessly. “Are there many of you there?”
The colonel looked silently at the officer of the suite, at the fat staff officer, at Zherkov, and frowned.
“Well, what is it, my friend, do you still want to be an adjutant? I’ve been thinking about you meanwhile.”
On all sides there were loving eyes, glistening with tears of joy, there were lips that wanted to kiss him.
“What fate!” he said. “Masha, dear!” And, throwing off his fur coat and boots, he went to his wife’s rooms.
“Oh, nothing,” he said, as if he was already sick of this one and the same question. “Will papa come soon?”
“Well, then accept his proposal. It’s really time you were married,” her mother said crossly and mockingly.
After the first monologue, the whole company stood up and surrounded Mlle George, expressing their rapture.
As a wounded animal at bay looks at the approaching dogs and hunters, Natasha looked from one to the other.
The talk was about Speransky, the news of whose sudden exile and alleged treason had just reached Moscow.17
S&#211;FYA ALEX&#193;NDROVNA (no family name) (S&#243;nya, Sophie), orphaned cousin of the younger Rostovs
Prince Ippolit fetched her reticule, came after her, and, moving his chair towards her, sat down close by.
“Lise,” Prince Andrei said drily, raising his tone to a degree which showed that his patience had run out.
He shot a glance at his cousin and the young lady guest: they both looked at him with a smile of approval.
“One is always too clever with the older children, wanting to do something extraordinary,” said the guest.
“Really, why don’t I go?” asked Pierre, looking at Anna Mikhailovna affectionately through his spectacles.
“From H&#233;lo&#239;se?”43 asked the prince, baring his still strong and yellowish teeth in a cold smile.
“Andr&#233;, I’m going to bless you with an icon, and you promise me never to take it off…Do you promise?”
“It was a pretty thing the way the Germans sent us carriages.3 You go riding along, you know: it’s grand!”
Nesvitsky and Zherkov were so astounded by this outburst that they silently stared wide-eyed at Bolkonsky.
“It’s always like that,” Nesvitsky said, waving his hand. “What are you doing here?” he turned to Zherkov.
“Now, Prince, you’ll find no wagons, nothing, and God knows where your Pyotr is,” said the other adjutant.
“Kari, mala, tafa, safi, muter, kask&#224;,” he pattered, trying to give his voice expressive intonations.
He pictured himself as of enormous size, a mighty man, flinging cannonballs at the French with both hands.
“I did not have the pleasure of seeing you,” Prince Andrei said coldly and abruptly. They all fell silent.
“Vous changerez, n’est-ce pas?” *246 said Liza, and when Princess Marya made no reply, Liza left the room.
In the evening Dolgorukov came back, went straight to the sovereign, and spent a long time alone with him.
“So you saw him?” asked Prince Andrei. “Well, what is Bonaparte like? What impression did he make on you?”
“Tomorrow,” thought Rostov, “I may very well be sent on some sort of mission to the sovereign. Thank God!”
He touched up his horse and, calling to him the column leader Miloradovich, gave him the order to advance.
“We’ll part, if you please, but only if you give me a fortune,” said H&#233;l&#232;ne…“To part—how scary!”
Alarmed by Denisov’s state, Rostov suggested he should undress, drink some water, and send for the doctor.
At nine o’clock in the morning of the appointed day, Prince Andrei appeared in Count Arakcheev’s anteroom.
Anisya Fyodorovna went eagerly with her light step to fulfill her master’s request and fetched the guitar.
T&#218;SHIN (no first name or patronymic), captain of Russian artillery at the battle of Sch&#246;ngraben
“Que voulez-vous? Lavater aurait dit que je n’ai pas la bosse de la paternit&#233;,” ‡17 said the prince.
“Quelle d&#233;licieuse personne, que cette petite princesse!” **32 Prince Vassily said to Anna Pavlovna.
“How good-looking the old man was,” said the countess, “even last year! I’ve never seen a handsomer man.”
“Sonya! The whole world is no use to me! You alone are everything,” said Nikolai. “I’ll prove it to you.”
“Look at her! Just look at her!” said the old countess, walking through the room and pointing at Natasha.
“Et moi qui ne me doutais pas!…”  exclaimed Princess Marya. “Ah! Andr&#233;, je ne vous voyais pas.” ‡160
“When it’s time for my wife to give birth, send to Moscow for an accoucheur *176 …So that he’ll be here.”
“General, I am duty-bound to obey orders, but I am not duty-bound to put up with…” Dolokhov said hastily.
“Wait, maybe you dropped it?” said Rostov, picking up first one pillow, then the other, and shaking them.
The lieutenant was sitting in the second room of the tavern over a plate of sausage and a bottle of wine.
“Well, as you will,” said the staff captain. “So, what’s become of the blackguard now?” he asked Denisov.
And they passed by, so that Nesvitsky never learned who got it in the teeth and what the ham referred to.
“Qui vivra verra,” **202 said Bilibin, again releasing his skin as a sign that the conversation was over.
The croups of the horses in the front row moved. Little Rook pulled at the reins and started off himself.
“J’esp&#232;re, que vous ne direz plus qu’on s’ennui chez moi” §229 —and she glanced at H&#233;l&#232;ne.
“I thank you all, gentlemen” (every word Rostov heard was like a sound from heaven), “with all my heart.”
“Don’t joke about that, Denisov,” cried Rostov, “this is such a lofty, such a beautiful feeling, such a…”
He made as if to rise. The generals bowed and withdrew. It was already past midnight. Prince Andrei left.
“What is it? What do you think?” Rostov turned to the hussar standing beside him. “Is it from the enemy?”
“Never mind, Princess, don’t worry,” said Marya Bogdanovna, “everything will be fine without the doctor.”
“No matter how much mama begged her, she refused, and I know she won’t change once she’s said something…”
“The predilection which, more than all others, made you vacillate on the path of virtue,” said the Mason.
Le mar&#233;chal se f&#226;che contre l’Empereur et nous punit tous; n’est-ce pas que c’est logique! †314
“Robber! Ungrateful creature!…cut you to pieces like a dog…not dealing with papa…thievery…racaille! ”*356
“Catch, Rugai!” he said, tossing him the cutoff paw with dirt stuck to it. “You earned it—right you are!”
“Come along, come along, Natasha,” said the count, turning back for his daughter. “How beautiful she is!”
“J’ai apport&#233; mon ouvrage,” †28 she said, unclasping her reticule and addressing them all together.
“Tell me, my dear,” she said, addressing Natasha, “what is this Mimi to you? Your daughter, it must be?”
“How is the count’s health? May I see him?” Pierre asked awkwardly, as usual, but without embarrassment.
“Courage, courage, mon ami. Il a demand&#233; de vous voir. C’est bien…” *132 And he was about to leave.
“And how soon will she give birth?” and, shaking his head reproachfully, said: “Not good! Go on, go on.”
“Well, ‘Your Excellency’ what? Your Excellency! Your Excellency! But Your Excellency what—nobody knows.”
The Austrian general had a displeased look, but he had no choice but to answer Kutuzov in the same tone.
“The hoof’s cracked! It’s nothing. I’ll teach you, I’ll show you what sort of clinch nail to put on it.”
“I cannot consider that,” Prince Andrei said coldly, and thought: “I’m going in order to save the army.”
“Christ be with you!” Kutuzov repeated and went to his carriage. “Get in with me,” he said to Bolkonsky.
“Herb liqueur’s possible,” said Tushin, “but even so, to understand the future life…” He did not finish.
“Attendez, j’ai des vues sur vous pour ce soir.” *226 She glanced at H&#233;l&#232;ne and smiled at her.
“What are you crying for, maman? ” said Vera. “From all that he writes, you should rejoice and not cry.”
“My God! what would happen to me if the sovereign addressed me!” thought Rostov. “I’d die of happiness.”
“What does that prove?” he was saying as Rostov rode up to them. “They could retreat and leave pickets.”
“Here I am!” she seemed to be saying, responding to the rapturous gaze of Denisov, who was watching her.
“And, finally, as a sign of openheartedness, I ask you to reveal to me your main predilection,” he said.
In an armchair next to them sat a thin, wrinkled old woman with a meek expression on her childlike face.
“Ah, good sir, what are you saying!” Pelageyushka said in horror, turning to Princess Marya for defense.
“It seems I chose the wrong time,” he said. “I wouldn’t have come, but I’m on business,” he said coldly…
The Bergs, having prepared everything necessary for the soir&#233;e, were ready to receive their guests.
“So this is how I’ll live out my life…I’ll die—right you are!—there’ll be nothing left. No use sinning!”
Petya, her brother, was also upstairs: he and his tutor were preparing fireworks to be set off at night.
“May I stay a while longer?” he asked, letting his fat body sink into an armchair beside Princess Marya.
He crossed himself towards the front corner14 and went up to Dolokhov, holding out his small, dark hand.
Anatole walked behind him with his usual swaggering stride. But uneasiness could be noticed on his face.
“So she went. Suddenly there was a strong wind. The girl lost her hat, and her long hairs came undone…”
“It’s all about the war,” the count shouted down the table. “My son’s going, Marya Dmitrievna, my son.”
She was about to leave, but he gestured for her to stop and took a new, uncut book from the tall table.
“Why a blue greatcoat? Away!…Sergeant major! Have him changed…the dir…” He did not have time to finish.
“If you won’t take money from me as a friend, you’ll offend me. I really have got it,” Rostov repeated.
The stupid smile that had disappeared during the conversation reappeared on the minister of war’s face.
“Kindly let this wagon pass. Don’t you see it’s a woman?” said Prince Andrei, riding up to the officer.
“Wait, listen. That’s really clever!” replied Sidorov, who was considered an expert at speaking French.
“Smash ’em, lads!” he kept saying and would seize the guns by the wheel and unscrew the screws himself.
“Well, what are they getting at me for?…” Tushin thought to himself, looking fearfully at his superior.
And he sat down in his place again, paying no further attention to the daughter he had driven to tears.
And old Captain Kirsten shouted enthusiastically and no less sincerely than the twenty-year-old Rostov.
“Thank God! All of them, thank God! They’ve just finished eating! Let me look at you, Your Excellency!”
“Well, all the same, tell him to come to the club—it will distract him. There’ll be a sumptuous feast.”
“And I just didn’t recognize you,” he said. But Rostov could not be bothered, he was shouting “Hurrah!”
But he glowered at her angrily and at the same time sufferingly, and bent over the baby with the glass.
“But what makes you live? With such thoughts, you’ll sit without moving, without undertaking anything…”
The assistant looked exhausted. He was clearly waiting with vexation for the garrulous doctor to leave.
Kochubey said a few words about the reception Arakcheev had given Bolkonsky. Speransky’s smile widened.
“Yes, yes,” Natasha said as if with vexation, sighed loudly, then again and again, and burst into sobs.
“Don’t think we’ll get in anybody’s way, uncle,” said Natasha. “We’ll stay in our places and not move.”
“Well, dear nephew, you’re up against a seasoned one,” said the uncle, “mind you don’t go petting him.”
“Let’s see…” Anatole looked at his watch. “We’ll go at once. Look sharp, Balaga. Eh? Will you make it?”
“Here, I’m not sorry, take it,” she said, obviously fearful before her master and sorry about the coat.
“You’ll be rendered what’s due you,” he said and, putting the envelope in his pocket, he left the shed.
“Prince Vassily came to Moscow yesterday. He’s going to do some inspecting, I’m told,” said the guest.
The next day Prince Vassily came and settled in the count’s house. He summoned Pierre and said to him:
“Il est assoupi,”  said Anna Mikhailovna, noticing the princess coming to replace them. “Allons.” *136
“Dieu sait quand reviendra…”  the prince sang off-key, laughed still more off-key, and left the table.
“Even if it was a great deal of trouble for me…” Prince Andrei said, as if guessing what it was about.
“Inform the prince that I haf set feuer  to the bridge,” the colonel said triumphantly and cheerfully.
“Your Excellency, I should like to be of use here. Allow me to stay in Prince Bagration’s detachment.”
Sidorov winked and, turning to the French, began pouring out a thick patter of incomprehensible words:
“Disposition for the attack on the enemy’s position behind Kobelnitz and Sokolnitz, 20 November 1805.”
“My cousin has nothing to do with it, and there is no point in talking about her!” he cried in a rage.
“Why talk about myself…you tell me, tell me about your journey and all you did there on your estates.”
“If you don’t want to do anything, just say so!” Rostov nearly shouted, not looking into Boris’s eyes.
“A pretty nice day, eh? For a chase and a gallop, eh?” said Nikolai, scratching Milka behind the ears.
“Ha, ha, ha!…That hussar, that hussar! Just like a boy, and the legs!…I can’t stand it!…” voices said.
The conversation ceased for a moment; the old general cleared his throat to draw attention to himself.
“Don’t call him bad,” said Natasha. “But I don’t know, I don’t know anything…” She began to cry again.
BERG, ALPH&#211;NSE K&#193;RLOVICH or K&#193;RLYCH (later called Ad&#243;lf), a young Russian officer
“Yes, I’ve heard about his plan for eternal peace,11 and it’s very interesting, but hardly possible…”
“What, have you lost your mind? Who’d let you? You get dizzy on the stairs,” came from various sides.
She became embarrassed, looked around, and, seeing her doll abandoned on a tub, took it in her hands.
“Mama! what’s for dessert?” Natasha’s little voice rang out still more resolutely, without faltering.
“And why are you here? Also to have lunch? The food’s quite good,” Telyanin went on. “Give it to me.”
“There’ll be a report in it for you,” said Zherkov. “Just see if I don’t get promoted sublieutenant.”
Prince Andrei ordered the driver to stop and asked the soldiers what action they had been wounded in.
“Well, Mister Adjutant, what news?” asked the officer, obviously wishing to strike up a conversation.
“I have the honor of reporting to you,” Prince Andrei repeated quite loudly, handing him an envelope.
He left and went to the servants’ room. Alpatych, his head bowed, was standing in the servants’ room.
“They’ll probably advance,” Bolkonsky replied, clearly not wishing to say more in front of strangers.
“To whom you suppose that I belong?” Prince Andrei said calmly and with an especially pleasant smile.
“Mon cher,”  Nesvitsky said to Prince Andrei in a whisper, “le vieux est d’une humeur de chien.” *266
“What silliness!” cried Natasha, laughing. “I don’t want to think or know about him or anybody else.”
“Well, that I don’t know, but I feel awkward with him. And do you know that he’s in love with Sonya?”
Nikolai, continuing to pace the room, glanced gloomily at Denisov and the girls, avoiding their eyes.
“My friend, really, it’s better not to wake him, he’s asleep,” the princess said in a pleading voice.
Pierre was gloomily silent, answered monosyllabically, and seemed to be immersed in his own thoughts.
“Or at least twenty thousand, Count,” he added, “and then a promissory note for only sixty thousand.”
“You’ve turned his head completely—but why? What do you want from him? You know you can’t marry him.”
“Because he’s young, because he’s poor, because he’s a relation…because you don’t love him yourself.”
“My beauty, my queen!” the nanny said, coming through the door. “And Sonyushka, too, what beauties!…”
It actually was Melyukovka, and maids and footmen with candles and joyful faces ran out to the porch.
“But what has happened between you?” she asked. “What has he told you? Why can’t he visit our house?”
“I’ll smash you in the mug, this is no laughing matter!” Anatole shouted, suddenly goggling his eyes.
On the thirteenth of July, the Pavlogradskies were to take part in serious action for the first time.
T&#205;KHON (no patronymic or family name) (T&#237;shka), old Prince Bolkonsky’s personal manservant
And he seized the bear and, hugging him and lifting him up, began waltzing around the room with him.
The adults began talking about Bonaparte. Julie, Mme Karagin’s daughter, turned to the young Rostov:
“Yes, I was brought up quite differently,” said the elder one, the beautiful Countess Vera, smiling.
“Yes, I am, but, please, let’s not do like just now…Another four years…Then I’ll ask for your hand.”
“Mon cher, vous m’avez promis,” *94 she addressed her son again, touching his hand to encourage him.
“Herself,” a rough female voice was heard in reply, after which Marya Dmitrievna came into the room.
He laughed drily, coldly, unpleasantly, as he always laughed—only with his mouth, not with his eyes.
“Yes, a pretty purse…Yes…yes…” he said and suddenly turned pale. “Have a look, young man,” he added.
“So much the worse for you. Bogdanych is rancorous, you’ll pay for your stubbornness,” said Kirsten.
“Where are you going?” he said suddenly, turning to Prince Andrei, who got up and made for his room.
“Let’s go in. I’ll have some bread and cheese,” said Prince Andrei, who had not yet had time to eat.
“What, are you wounded, dear heart?” asked Tushin, coming to the cannon on which Rostov was sitting.
Prince Vassily, finding himself alone with the prince, at once declared to him his wishes and hopes.
“Send for him, send for him! Well, and what’s this German like?” Rostov asked with a scornful smile.
“My God! How happy I’d be if he ordered me right now to throw myself into the fire,” thought Rostov.
Pierre did not hear what they were saying, but he knew it was about him. He blushed and turned away.
“C’est le doute qui est flatteur,” †299 said l’homme &#224; l’esprit profond 11 with a subtle smile.
Rostov explained to him that he would like to see the hussar major Denisov, who was a patient there.
The financial affairs of the Rostovs did not improve during the two years they spent in the country.
“And where’s Nikolashka? Over at the Lyadovsky knoll, is he?” the count went on asking in a whisper.
Prince Nikolai Andreich became more animated and voiced his way of thinking about the impending war.
Natasha, saying nothing, went up to her father and looked at him with questioningly astonished eyes.
“Natalie?!” his voice whispered questioningly, and someone squeezed her hands painfully. “Natalie?!”
“Well, and I thank you. Do you think I’m not grateful to you?” Anatole sighed and embraced Dolokhov.
